--- Page 1 ---
RIZONA
ANDSCAPE
ALMS
ELIZABETH DAVISON
Department of Plant Sciences
JOHN BEGEMAN
AZ1021 • 12/2000
and other services to individuals and institutions that function without regard to sex, race, religion, color, national origin, age, Vietnam Era Veteran's status,
or disability.
--- Page 2 ---
Contents
Landscape Use.........................................3
Adaptation................................................3
Planting Palms.........................................3
Care of Established Palms......................5
Diseases and Insect Pests .......................6
Palms for Arizona....................................6
Feather Palms...........................................8
Fan Palms................................................12
Palm-like Plants.....................................16
This information has been reviewed by university faculty.
ag.arizona.edu/pubs/garden/az1121.pdf
(cid:1)
--- Page 3 ---
Adaptation
The luxuriant tropical appearance and stately
silhouette of palms add much to the Arizona landscape. Palms generally can be grown below the 4000 ft level
Few other plants are as striking in low and mid elevation in Arizona. However, microclimate may make the
gardens. Although winter frosts and low humidity limit difference between success and failure in a given location.
the choices somewhat, a good number of palms are Frost pockets, where nighttime cold air tends to collect,
available, ranging from the dwarf Mediterranean Fan should be avoided, especially for the tender species. Palms
palm to the massive Canary Island Date palm. Several of are most sensitive to cold as small plants. As a tree
the palms described in this publication are unavailable or approaches maturity, it withstands low temperatures with
nearly so in Arizona. They have been included because less injury. However, few of the tropical and subtropical
they have the potential to broaden the landscape palms grown in southern Florida and southern California
versatility of this important plant group. In time they may can tolerate the winter freezes that occur even in the
become more available as a result of consumer demand or mildest sections of Arizona. On the other hand, the
the risky and expensive process of introduction by the desert’s high summer temperatures and low humidity
nursery industry. eliminate other palm species, notably those from humid
coastal climates. Shelter from strong winds can sometimes
Landscape Use be provided by hills, buildings, or groups of other trees.
One palm species, California Fan Palm (Washingtonia
Palms are planted in groves, clumps or as single
filifera) is native to the oases and canyons of Arizona and
specimens for accent or background planting. They are
California. Other palms may be grown in the greatest
used around public buildings, in parks, along avenues,
variety in the landscapes of Yuma, Phoenix and
near swimming pools and patios and in the garden
neighboring areas. As the elevation increases, the number
wherever a bold effect or suggestion of the tropics is
of adapted species generally tend to decrease. The hardiest
desired. The large-growing palms provide a dramatic
types such as California Fan, Mediterranean Fan,
feeling of space. In an architectural sense, they serve to
Windmill Fan, Canary Island Date, and Mexican Blue can
define large spaces and to create strong vertical accents
be grown in such communities as Kingman, Globe,
and skyline silhouettes. These qualities have a unifying
Nogales and Douglas. During severe winters even these
effect in massive building complexes and large-scale
hardy species, especially young plants, may freeze out.
plantings. The smaller growing palm species are equally
valuable in the home landscape, providing shade, shelter
and tropical ambiance.
Palms often are planted in straight, formal rows along
Planting Palms
roads and drives. Another interesting effect can be
achieved by making a group or clump planting of several
palms of the same species in varying heights and Small Containerized Palms:
spacings. Such natural groupings make striking features
The best time for planting palms is during warm weather
for entrances, pool plantings and gardens in general. The
when root growth is most active. Soil temperatures above
slow growing and dwarf species can be planted under
65° F aid root establishment. This generally includes the
other trees and in tubs or planters where they remain
period from April through September. The preferred time is
effective for years.
late spring to early summer.
Which to choose? One of the important considerations
A fertile, well-drained soil will promote luxuriant
in selecting a palm is to choose an adapted species that
growth. One of the most important requirements is that the
will mature to a reasonable size for the location.
planting site be well-drained. Caliche, hardpan, com-
Otherwise, the pretty little palm brought from the nursery
pacted soil layers, or abrupt changes in soil texture prevent
in a 5-gallon container may grow one day into a monster
good soil drainage and aeration. The result is constantly
that overpowers house and garden. Analyze the planting
wet, saturated soil in the planting pit and almost certain
site for vertical space, avoiding roof overhangs. It is a
death of transplanted palms.
serious mistake to plant tall-growing palms under power
To test for drainage, fill the hole with water. Allow to
lines. In addition, all palms need a certain amount of care
drain, and fill a second time. If the second filling does not
and grooming. Some fast-growing species require more
drain out within 24 hours, alternate provisions must be
attention than others. Your choice should reflect how
made for drainage. If necessary, dig a chimney down to a
much time, effort, and expense you are willing to devote to
porous strata to permit excess irrigation water to drain
maintenance.
from the hole.
(cid:2)
--- Page 4 ---
Do not amend the backfill with manure or organic species, increased root regeneration has been measured
material. This will eventually result in the palm sinking with longer cut stubs in larger root balls. Root regeneration
into the hole. Sand at more than 1/3 total volume is depends on adequate water and oxygen. At times the root
acceptable, if the soil is extremely heavy. ball may be deeper than it is wide. In general, larger root
Dig the planting hole as deep as the root ball and 2 feet balls make for better establishment in less than perfect
wider on each side. Set the crown of the containerized conditions.
palm at the original soil level so that soil temperatures, Water of dug palms is stored in the trunk and lost
water and aeration are conducive to root expansion. Do through the leaves. For this reason, up to half of older
not cover the crown or young trunk with soil. New roots living fronds may be removed for transport. The remaining
will emerge both above and below the rootball. Settle the fronds are tied together over the tender bud with a
backfill soil with a water from a hose. biodegradable twine to protect it from drying and sun
Water thoroughly at planting time. Make a berm above scald. (On some species the bud may be actually splinted
grade (about 2 feet out from the trunk) so that slow soak to protect it from breaking.) Depending on the time of year
from hose or bubbler can gradually fill it and saturate the the palm is planted, the fronds should be left tied around
root zone. Palms that are set out in warm weather will the bud for 2 to 3 months. In arid climates, the chance of the
probably need to be watered every day for the first 2 weeks twine actually rotting is slim. When new growth begins to
after planting. Check the soil moisture content in the root bulge out below the point at which the fronds are tied, the
ball to determine this, since the container soil will often dry rope may be cut to gradually release the foliage. Leave the
out faster than the surrounding backfill soil. The goal at old fronds in place for a month more to protect the bud and
this stage is to keep the root ball moist but not constantly new leaves.
soggy wet. The planting hole for large pre-dug palms should be
As roots begin to grow out and draw moisture from a only as deep as the root ball and should drain in 24 hours
greater volume of soil, irrigations can be spaced further as discussed above. Backfill need not be amended. Loosen
apart. the soil 3 feet beyond each side of the root ball to encourage
lateral root growth.
(cid:127) Bubbler Irrigating: every day for the first 2 weeks Large pre-dug palms should be planted at their
gradually increasing the interval to every 7 days for original planting depth. Planting too deeply may cause
the remainder of the first growing season, depending root suffocation due to restricted oxygen, nutritional
on soil type (see below). deficiencies, root rot disease and frequently loss of the
palm.
(cid:127) Drip Irrigating: with 4 emitters spaced 1.5 – 2 feet from Don’t plant the crowns deep simply to ensure that the
the trunk, and 8 emitters spaced 4 feet from the trunk. trees don’t fall over.
Daily to start, then gradually increase the time Large palms may be braced when installed with at
between irrigations according to the soil type. least three 2x4 lumber braces (at 45° from the ground)
against 1 ft lengths of 2x4 that are vertically strapped or
In both cases, the timing and frequency of irrigations will banded around the trunk.
depend on how well the soil holds water. Sandy soils will
drain quickly and need more frequent applications than
clay soils. Always water to a depth of 2 ft. Check with a
probe, long screwdriver or piece of rebar to see if the soil is
soft to that depth. A layer of mulch spread 2–4" over the
irrigated zone will help to reduce soil temperatures and
conserve water so that less frequent applications are
necessary.
Large Pre-dug Palms:
Large landscape palms are usually dug from established
groves or landscape plantings. They must be handled
gently and with care in all phases of the transplanting
operation. Rough handling or bumping can damage the
terminal bud and kill the tree. Once dug from the original
location, palms should not be left lying out in the hot sun
for long periods of time either at the digging site or at the
planting site. The root ball should be kept moist, and the
trunk securely braced in transit. One way to accomplish
this is to cover the root ball with damp burlap. Do not use Protect the trunk with nylon, burlap, or other suitable
plastic for this purpose, since it will trap heat. material where the one foot lengths of 2x4 are secured. Do
Dug palms regenerate some roots from the cut ends, not nail these vertical pieces into the trunk. Supports can
but other new roots develop from the root crown. In some be removed when fronds are untied.
(cid:3)
--- Page 5 ---
Water large palms immediately as discussed above. .5% Fe, and S, Zn, Cu, and B (micronutrients that are often
Daily irrigations to a depth of 2 ft may gradually be lacking). Apply this product to palms after their first
reduced to once a week during the first warm season. establishment summer, following directions on the label
Allow for differences in soil texture: clay soils will need for the tree’s size. Spread the product under the canopy
watering less often than sandy soils. Bubbler or soaker (avoiding the area next to the trunk) in mid spring and
irrigation into a built-up well should wet an area 2 feet again in early summer. Water thoroughly to the 2 ft depth
beyond the root ball. As discussed above, drip emitters
should be spaced at 2 feet and at 4 feet beyond the trunk. Pruning
The pruning requirements of palms vary from species to
species. As new foliage is produced from the terminal bud
Care of Established Palms
at the top of the crown, the lower and older leaves (fronds)
gradually turn brown and die. If left alone, these
eventually fall off, some sooner than others. Pruning of
Palms in Turf
palms can keep them looking tidy, but pruning too high up
Palms are often planted in turf areas. To look their best,
or too close on the trunk can cause damage, disease, water
they should be separated from the turf by a small mulched
uptake problems, or trunk constriction.
area that prevents the grass from growing right up against
In some cases, old dead leaves persist for a long time to
the trunk. Weed-whip and mower wounds on palm trunks
form a thatch or “shag” or “skirt” which may be
are permanent and provide an entrance for diseases and
considered attractive in large scale situations. A thatch of
insects. Palms in turf should also be protected from
dry leaves is left on the Fan Palms by those who feel that
sprinkler spray, both because the terminal bud may
this is part of the character of the trees. Those who consider
develop a heart rot disease and because salts from water
the dead leaves objectionable have them removed each
evaporation can encrust on the trunk or leaves. Because
year.
irrigation schedules for turf are not adequate for palm
In any case, green leaves should not be removed. Do
establishment, the trees should be on their own schedule
not prune up beyond the horizontal since this exposes
that will allow deeper watering to the 2' depth.
tender tissues and may lead to disease, bud damage,
splitting or constriction of the trunk (called “pencil
Irrigation
pointing”). Palms that have been pruned too close often
Deep watering on a periodical basis is crucial for break in winds. Typically the leaf bases are allowed to stay
landscape palms in the desert. Native palms grow at until they are completely dry, thus easier to cut off. The old
oases; they are not “drought tolerant.” To some extent leaf bases on California and Mexican Fan palms or
growth rate can be regulated by watering practices. In Mediterranean Fans can be cut off with a sharp linoleum
general trees growing in sandy soils need irrigation more knife. Shaving or skinning trunks is unnecessary and may
frequently than those planted in clay soil. Roots of cause wounds that allow entry of insects or disease.
established palms should be encouraged to extend 4 feet Another group of palms lose leaves almost as soon as
beyond the trunk by spacing drip emitters in a circle at the they begin to age. Some develop a smooth trunk that shows
4 ft distance. Established palms of most species do well a pattern of ring-like scars where old leaves were once
with slow irrigation to a 2 ft depth every couple weeks in attached. Some people think the Date Palms need
summer and the same amount every four to six weeks in considerable grooming to look good; others like the full
winter. round head. The correct technique is to remove yellow or
brown leaves and flower/fruit stalks in June or July. Leaf
Fertilization
bases may be left on until they are easier to remove. Do not
Palms look considerably better if they have adequate remove green leaves. Do not prune up beyond the
nutrients. Fertilizing established palms is one of the horizontal since this leads to bud damage, disease, or
important ways to keeping them vigorous and attractive. “pencil pointing” of the trunk. Palms should not look like
In Arizona landscapes, nitrogen is the most commonly carrots.
deficient nutrient; when it is lacking, older fronds turn In parts of Arizona where palms are marginally cold-
pale green or yellow. Many palms in certain soils also hardy, the foliage may be injured by low winter
suffer from potassium deficiency (yellowing of older temperatures. Lower and outer leaves usually show the
leaves, including midrib). Some trees show Magnesium most extensive injury. Trees that have been over-pruned
deficiencies (yellow band on older leaves, with central tend to be vulnerable. Damaged fronds can be removed in
vein remaining green). In all cases preventative fertiliza- the spring in the annual trimming. Some species have
tion is best, since the discolored leaves don’t recover. messy flower or fruit stalks that can be cut off close to the
Lush green growth will result from using a “palm trunk. If annual pruning is scheduled for after flower
special” fertilizer that contains about 3 times as much stalks have emerged, both stalks and brown fronds can be
nitrogen and potassium as phosphorous (the first and removed in a single operation.
third numbers on the bag are approximately 3 times the Nails or spikes should not be used to climb palms.
middle number), plus Mg and micronutrients. Look for a Wounds in the trunk are permanent. In all cases, gloves,
product that supplies 10-20% N, 5%P, and 10-20% K goggles, and head protection should be worn. Engage the
(roughly equal to N), and also includes 1-3% Mg, .5% Mn , services of a certified arborist for big palms.
(cid:4)
--- Page 6 ---
Diseases and Insect Pests Palm flower caterpillars are not especially noticeable
until the maturing larvae drop to the ground beneath the
tree. At this time they may become a litter nuisance in the
Texas Root Rot (Phymatotrichum omnivorum)
landscape or in buildings to which they migrate in search
All palms are resistant to Texas root rot and may be
of shelter.
planted in soils infested with the fungus. However, palms
growing in infested soil should not be transplanted to non-
Treatment: Remove flower stalks before they are fully
infested areas, as their roots may harbor and spread the
fungus.
necessary, for chemical control recommendations.
Giant Palm borer (Dinapate wrighti)
Lightning Injury
A large beetle whose larvae or grubs live inside the trunks
Lightning may injure or kill palms.
of both Phoenix and Washingtonia palms.
Symptoms: Overnight collapse of the crown foliage or
Symptoms: Round holes in the trunks, about the size of a
shattering and charring of the terminal bud on large palms
quarter, indicate where the adult beetle has exited after 3 to
following severe thunderstorms may be due to lightning.
9 years of feeding on the trunk tissue. Many grubs feeding
In some cases the only apparent damage is a thin, jagged
inside a palm can weaken the trunk to the point that it may
groove and strip of shattered bark extending down the
snap off in a high wind.
trunk. If the bud or upper trunk is damaged extensively,
the tree will probably die. The sudden collapse of leaves is
Treatment: None reported to date. Avoid buying trees with
sometimes incorrectly diagnosed as a symptom of bud rot.
the visible exit holes. Proper planting and care to ensure
good health and vigor, and the ability to resist the insect, is
Treatment: Little can be done for a lightning-struck palm
the best way to aid your trees. The number of holes will
other than routine irrigation. The full extent of injury is not
give in indication as to the degree of infestation.
always obvious immediately after a lightning strike
occurs. Damage that at first seems superficial may later
Diamond Scale
prove to be serious or lethal. Within a period of several
(Sphaerodothus neowashingtonia)
weeks, it is usually clear whether the tree will recover.
Affects Washingtonia fan palms.
Root-knot nematode
Symptoms: Appearance of black, diamond-shaped fruiting
structures (several centimeters in length) that appear on Root-knot nematodes, Meloidogyne species, infect roots of
leaf blades and petioles. Spores are large and black and many different plants and have been reported on many
often in such abundance that leaves appear to be covered different kinds of palms. The nematodes invade the roots,
with sooty mold. Leaves turn yellow, droop, and especially small feeder roots, and disrupt the movement of
eventually die. nutrients and water. Small roots are often killed. Root-knot
nematode infection often can be easily recognized by the
Treatment: No effective treatment reported at this time. swellings on the roots of many host plants, but in palms
Removal of infected foliage and use of a protective these symptoms may not be noticeable since swellings are
fungicide may help. very small. Root-knot nematodes are most active in warm,
moist, sandy soils that are also the best conditions for root
Palm Flower Caterpillars — Palm Budworms growth of many palm species. Severe infections result in
decline of the entire tree. Newly emerging fronds may be
(Litoprosopus coachella)
small and bunchy. There is no known resistance in palms.
The adult stage of this insect is a tan moth with two black
Once introduced into soils, root-knot nematode is impos-
eyes on each hind wing. The larva is a 1-inch pink-to-
sible to eradicate. Prevent disease by planting only vigor-
greenish caterpillar that feeds on the flowers of some fan
ous plants with healthy root systems. If replanting an
palms. While the injury is not serious, it may predispose
infested site, soil can be fumigated by a licensed pest
the tree to infection by palm bud rot.
control applicator prior to planting with a fumigant such
as metam sodium.
(cid:5)
--- Page 7 ---
Palms for Arizona Those with palmate leaves are commonly known as “fan”
palms.
It is convenient to distinguish two groups of palms on the
basis of leaf form. Palms with pinnate leaves are called
“feather palms.”
The following species are grouped accordingly.
See the map below to evaluate a species for your area. For
further information, see Arizona Plant Climate Zones
(cid:6)
--- Page 8 ---
Feather Palms
Common Name: Queen Palm Common Name: Pindo Palm
Scientific Name: Syagrus romanzoffianum Scientific Name: Butia capitata
Description: This tall, graceful palm displays a luxurious Description: A crown of gray-green fronds strongly
head of arching 10– to 15–foot fronds. Prominent rings recurved, create a graceful cascading effect for this
develop on the smooth gray, upright trunk. The bright- feather palm. The stocky trunk becomes patterned
green, feathery leaves form long, papery filaments with the stubs of old leaf bases. Females bear large
with exposure to wind and temperature extremes. clusters of edible fruits with a pineapple-like flavor.
Landscape Use: The Queen Palm creates a lush, tropical Landscape Use: Pindo Palm is excellent as a low, bushy
effect for pools, home gardens or courtyards of large specimen for containers, tubs or gardens. It is
buildings. It makes a showy appearance both as a attractive when interplanted among tall, slender
single specimen or clumped in groups. palms.
Foliage: Evergreen Foliage: Evergreen
Climate Zone: (4), 5 Climate Zone: (4), 5
Height: 30'-40' Height: 10'-20'
Light Exposure: Part shade to full sun Light Exposure: Part shade, full or reflected sun
Spread: 15'-30' Spread: 5'-15'
Water Use: Medium to high Water Use: Medium to high
Growth Rate: Moderate to fast Growth Rate: Slow
Trunk Width: 1.5–2' Trunk Width: 1 - 2'
Cultural Requirements: This palm responds well to Cultural Requirements: Old fronds need to be cut evenly
nitrogen fertilizer, extra iron and ample water. to avoid a ragged appearance. Deep, infrequent
Planting in protected areas helps to reduce wind irrigation is best.
damage.
Problems: Iron chlorosis can occur on alkaline and poorly
Problems: Sensitivity to cold generally limits use to below drained soils. Susceptibility is shown to bud rot and
2500 feet in elevation. Fronds may develop iron root knot nematodes.
chlorosis or Manganese deficiency. Susceptibility is
shown to spider mites, root knot nematodes, and bud
rot. Possible damage in high winds.
(cid:7)
--- Page 9 ---
Common Name: Costa Rican Parlor Palm Common Name: Chilean Wine Palm
Scientific Name: Chamaedorea costaricana Scientific Name: Jubaea chilensis
Description: This small clump-forming palm has slender Description: The Chilean Wine Palm develops a massive,
bamboo-like trunks and graceful feathery leaves. columnar trunk which is one of the thickest of all
palms. This self-pruning species forms a handsome
Landscape Use: Tolerance to low light levels makes Costa
patterned surface on the gray trunk. The dense feather-
Rican Parlor Palm an excellent plant for warm shaded
duster crown is made up of stiff, bristling leaves.
outdoor areas or for indoor use. This is a frost tender
palm. Outdoors it it best used as a container plant. Landscape Use: The massive character of Chilean Wine
Palm merits its use as a specimen in parks and large
Foliage: Evergreen
garden areas.
Climate Zone: (3), (4), (5)
Foliage: Evergreen
Height: 8'-10'
Climate Zone: (4), (5)
Light Exposure: Full shade
Height: 50'-80'
Spread: 4'-6'
Light Exposure: Full sun
Water Use: Medium to high
Spread: 20'-30'
Growth Rate: Moderate to fast
Water Use: Medium to high
Trunk Width: clumping
Growth Rate: Extremely Slow
Cultural Requirements: The Parlor Palm thrives in moist
Trunk Width: 4'-6'
soil but will stand some neglect in watering. The
shaded, protected locations required for outdoor use Cultural Requirements: Regular watering and fertiliza-
will usually be a few degrees warmer than nearby tion is best.
open areas on cold nights. When temperatures drop
Problems: Not commonly available in Arizona.
below the mid-20s in open areas, container plants
should be moved indoors.
Problems: None recorded in Arizona other than sensitiv-
ity to frost.
(cid:8)
--- Page 10 ---
Common Name: Canary Island Date Palm Common Name: Date Palm
Scientific Name: Phoenix canariensis Scientific Name: Phoenix dactylifera
Description: Canary Island Date Palm is a large, wide- Description A rough textured slender trunk and feathery,
spreading feather palm of majestic proportions. The widespreading canopy characterize the Date Palm.
glistening, dark green leaves with orange midribs are The gray-green head of leaves is ascending in the
long and arching, giving the crown a distinct center and downcurving towards the outside, giving a
fountain-like outline and form. The trunk of young stiff formal appearance. Offshoots may appear at
trees is pineapple-shaped becoming columnar at ground level or on the trunk. Trees are male or female,
maturity. Female trees produce clusters of orange- and both sexes must be planted to ensure fruit
yellow fruit in the fall. production. In some areas, pollen can be obtained
commercially to fertilize a single female tree.
Landscape Use: Most effectively used along avenues, in
parks and large commercial and residential land- Landscape Uses: In urban landscapes this palm makes a
scapes. Young trees make attractive and undemand- dramatic specimen tree. It is also planted in rows
ing container subjects. along roadways and drives. The Date Palm blends
well with desert growth to give a feeling of a desert
Foliage: Evergreen
oasis. Its slender trunk makes this species more
Climate Zone: 4, 5
graceful for some landscape uses than Canary Island
Height: 40'-50' Date Palm.
Light Exposure: Part shade, full or reflected sun Foliage: Evergreen
Spread: 20'-40' Climate Zone: 4, 5
Water Use: Medium to high Height: 50'-60'
Growth Rate: Slow Light Exposure: Part shade to full sun
Trunk Width: 3'-4' Spread: 25'-35'
Cultural Requirements: Deep, regular irrigation and Water Use: Low, medium or high
fertilization encourages faster growth. Periodic prun-
Growth Rate: Slow
ing and grooming are necessary for best appearance.
Trunk Width: 2'-2.5'
Problems: Fruit is messy and attractive to birds. Pruning
Cultural Requirements: To develop a single trunk or
maintenance can be costly. Dry rot is sometimes an
maintain a neat appearance, offshoots need to be
unsightly problem on frond stubs and trunk. This
removed or limited to a few in number. Transplanting
palm recovers slowly from frost damage. Susceptible
is best in summer. Regular irrigation and fertilizer
to rootknot nematodes, bud rot, and palm borers. May
encourages best growth.
develop magnesium deficiency.
Problems: Old fronds and fruit drop require considerable
cleanup. Too messy for pool/patio use. Susceptible to
bud rot, palm borer, and nematodes. Pruning may be
costly when the palm is tall.
(cid:9)(cid:10)
--- Page 11 ---
Common Name: Senegal Date Palm Common name: Pygmy Date Palm
Scientific Name: Phoenix reclinata Scientific Name: Phoenix roebelinii
Description: Tall and slender, this species develops a Description: This dwarf, slow-growing palm develops a
dense head of graceful, feathery fronds. The bright dense, graceful crown on a single, straight to curving
green leaves are much smaller than those of the trunk. The arching finely cut, dark green leaves create
Canary Island or Date Palm. Suckers from the base can a delicate, refined appearance.
be encouraged to form a tree with several trunks. These
Landscape Use: The Pygmy Date Palm is valued as a
tend to lean away from one another as they mature.
highly decorative, small-scale palm for protected
Hybrids of this species and Canary Island Date Palm
locations. It is ideally suited for container culture.
are hardier and more massive in scale.
Foliage: Evergreen
Landscape Use: This is a very striking specimen palm
Climate Zone: 5
adapted for use in warm, sheltered microclimates in
low elevation desert locations. The slender leaning Height: 6'-8'
habit of the clump form lends great charm and a Light Exposure: Part shade to full sun
distinctly tropical appearance to the landscape.
Spread: 3'-5'
Foliage: Evergreen
Water Use: Medium to high
Climate Zone: (5)
Growth Rate: Slow
Height: 20'-30'
Cultural Requirements: Regular watering and applica-
Light Exposure: Part shade to full sun tion of nitrogen fertilizer promotes vigorous, lush
Spread: 8'-12' growth.
Water Use: Medium to high Problems: Spines present on the leaf petiole are a minor
nuisance. Frost damage is likely in cold microclimates.
Growth Rate: Moderate
Susceptible to micronutrient deficiencies
Trunk Width: clumping
Cultural Requirements: Plants respond well to regular
watering and application of nitrogen fertilizers. Not
commonly available in Arizona.
Problems: For use in protected, nearly frost-free areas only.
Severe frost damage may be expected when tempera-
tures fall below the mid-20s F.
(cid:9)(cid:9)
--- Page 12 ---
FAN PALMS
Common Name: Mexican Blue Palm Common Name: Guadalupe Fan Palm
Scientific Name: Brahea armata Scientific Name: Brahea edulis
Description: Waxy, silvery-blue leaves arch gracefully Description: A robust, handsome palm similar to Mexican
from the erect columnar trunk of this striking palm. Blue Palm but faster growing and with less
Faintly fragrant, creamy white flowers are arrayed on conspicuous flowers. Large, medium green leaves
flower stalks 18 feet or more in length. Some consider it hold their color well through the winter and shed
better appearing in youth since mature specimens cleanly. Flowers appear on 4-5 foot long stalks and are
develop a stockier trunk and the foliage has a less followed by heavy clusters of small, black edible fruit.
pronounced blue color.
Landscape Use: This fan palm is excellent as a specimen,
Landscape Use: This beautiful tree offers much versatility in groups, or as a container plant when young. It is
as a landscape palm or as a container subject. The more effective for smaller scale use than
attractive blue foliage makes a nice contrast with Washingtonias.
desert vegetation.
Foliage: Evergreen
Foliage: Evergreen
Climate Zone: (4), 5
Climate Zone: (4), 5
Height: 20'-30'
Height: 25'-30'
Light Exposure: Part shade, full or reflected sun
Light Exposure: Part shade, full or reflected sun
Spread: 8'-10'
Spread: 6'-10'
Water Use: Low to medium
Water Use: Low to medium
Growth Rate: Slow to moderate
Growth Rate: Slow
Trunk Width: 2.5'-3'
Trunk Width: 3'+
Cultural Requirements: This species adapts to a wide
Cultural Requirements: Mexican Blue Palm tolerates variety of soil and cultural conditions. Deep,
extremes of heat, cold, wind and a wide range of infrequent irrigation is best.
growing conditions. Regular, widely spaced irrigation
Problems: None recorded in Arizona.
is best.
Problems: None reported.
(cid:9)(cid:1)
--- Page 13 ---
Common Name: Mediterranean Fan Palm Common Name: Chinese Fountain Palm or
Scientific Name: Chamaerops humilis Chinese Fan Palm
Scientific Name: Livistona chinensis
Description: This slow grower is one of the most cold- Description: Chinese Fountain Palm develops a rounded
hardy of all palms. The distinctive fan-shaped fronds fountain-like crown of graceful leaves atop a slender
are composed of stiff, blue-green to gray-green leaflets. trunk. The shiny, bright green foliage forms a
These eventually form a compact head at the end of distinctive fringe of drooping leaf tips on mature
each curved stem. In Arizona, the bushy, multi- plants. The large 3- to 5-foot fans are self-cleaning,
trunked type is the most commonly used form of this leaving an attractive, leaf-scarred trunk.
highly variable species.
Landscape Use: A striking landscape specimen for warm
Landscape Use: The suckering habit eventually results in winter areas. Tolerance of low light conditions makes
pleasing stem groupings and much landscape it an excellent plant for indoor use when young. It is
interest. This small palm makes a striking accent plant not commonly available in Arizona.
against architectural features. It is one of the best
Foliage: Evergreen
species for containers as well as for massing at the
Climate Zone: (4), 5
base of taller growing palms.
Height: 15'-25'
Foliage: Evergreen
Light Exposure: Part shade
Climate Zone: (4), 5
Spread: 10'-15'
Height: 5'-15'
Water Use: Medium to high
Light Exposure: Part shade to full sun
Growth Rate: Slow to moderate
Spread: 5'-20'
Trunk Width: 1'-2'
Water Use: Low, medium or high
Cultural Requirements: Afternoon shade is important in
Growth Rate: Slow
hot desert climates.
Trunk Width: clumping
Problems: Frost damage is likely in cold microclimates.
Cultural Requirements: Mediterranean Fan Palm sur-
vives much neglect but grows best in rich soil with
ample water. Some pruning may be necessary to limit
the number of stems and to remove old fronds.
Problems: None recorded in Arizona.
(cid:9)(cid:2)
--- Page 14 ---
Common Name: Sonoran Palmetto Common Name: Windmill Palm
Scientific Name: Sabal uresana Scientific Name: Trachycarpus fortunei
Description: This picuresque fan palm is native to the Description: Windmill Palm is small, slow-growing and
canyons and tablelands of Sonora, Mexico. Young tolerant of both heat and cold. Fan-shaped leaves are
plants are particularly attractive forming a cluster of displayed in a windmill-like fashion in a compact,
large bluish-green fans with deeply divided segments. regular head. The slender, upright trunk tapers
With maturity, the blue color of the fans becomes less inversely from top to bottom. Stubs of old fronds
prominent and a fairly stout trunk develops. protrude from a shaggy covering of hairy, black fibers.
Landscape Use: The Sonoran Palmetto is excellent as a Landscape Use: This semi-dwarf compact species is
specimen, along avenues or in parks. effective for tropical plantings, atriums and contain-
ers. It makes artistic pairs for an entryway, along a
Foliage: Evergreen
narrow walk or drive.
Climate Zone: 4, 5
Foliage: Evergreen
Height: 30'-40'
Climate Zone: 4, 5
Light Exposure: Full sun
Height: 15'-25'
Spread: 15'-25'
Light Exposure: Part shade to full sun
Water Use: Low to medium
Spread: 6'-8'
Growth Rate: Slow
Water Use: Medium to high
Trunk Width: 2'-3'
Growth Rate: Slow
Cultural Requirements: Once established, this palm is
Trunk Width: 1'
very cold hardy. Well drained soil is necessary for best
growth. Cultural Requirements: Responds well to regular
irrigation and fertilizer. Appearance is best when
Problems: Not commonly available in Arizona.
grown in the shelter of taller trees or on the east side of
structures where the tree is shaded from afternoon
sun. Occasional pruning is necessary for a neat
appearance.
Problems: Fronds may become tattered in high winds and
tip-burn with reflected sun and heat.
(cid:9)(cid:3)
--- Page 15 ---
Common Name: California Fan Palm Common Name: Mexican Fan Palm
Scientific Name: Washingtonia filifera Scientific Name: Washingtonia robusta
Description: A powerful, stately palm whose heavy trunk Description: This tall, graceful fast-growing palm is well
supports a crown of large, fan-shaped leaves. Foliage adapted to Arizona’s heat and low humidity. Bright
stands erect and spreading on spiny petioles when green, fan-shaped leaves form a luxuriant but more
compact head than California Fan Palm. The trunk
young. With maturity, leaves droop to the smooth
flares at the base but tapers into a slender column
trunk forming a handsome thatch. The California
above. The dry leaf thatch is not so uniform or
desert type retains the dead fronds all the way to the
attractive as that of the California Fan Palm. It may be
ground unless trimmed. This species hybridizes easily
removed or allowed to hang naturally, and oftenbreaks
with W. robusta, so that a large variation in appearance
loose. This species hybridizes easily with W. filifera, so
is possible, even from commercial sources. that a large variation in appearance is possible, even
Landscape Use: The massive character of this palm tends from commercial sources.
to dominate small landscapes and small structures. Landscape Use: Planted as a street or park tree, lawn
The best use is as a street or park tree or a specimen in specimen and in groups for a tropical effect. Its height,
form and ease of transplanting make it a popular
large-scale landscapes.
landscape specimen to lend vertical scale to large
Foliage: Evergreen
spaces.
Climate Zone: (3),4, 5 Foliage: Evergreen
Height: 40'-60' Climate Zone: (4), 5
Height: 40'-100'
Light Exposure: Part shade to full sun
Light Exposure: Part shade to full sun
Spread: 15'-20'
Spread: 10'-15'
Water Use: Low to medium Water Use: Low, medium or high
Growth Rate: Moderate to fast Growth Rate: Fast
Trunk Width: 2.5'-3'
Trunk Width: 4'-5'
Cultural Requirements: Tolerance is shown to poor
Cultural Requirements: Some drought tolerance is shown
conditions but best growth occurs with good soil and
but prefers regular, infrequent, deep irrigation. Good
regular irrigation. Occasional grooming is needed.
soil drainage is important. Periodic grooming im- Fertilize annually.
proves appearance. Fertilize annually in spring or
Problems: Although often injured by winter cold, near the
summer. limits of its range this palm regrows a new head of
Problems: Thatch may harbor pests and be a fire hazard. leaves by midspring. Thatch usually breaks loose on
tall trees. Somewhat more disease-resistant than other
Yearly trimming can be costly. Susceptible to bud rot
palms. Palm flower caterpillars are an occasional litter
and root knot nematodes.
problem beneath the tree or in nearby structures.
Avoid planting near power lines.
(cid:9)(cid:4)
--- Page 16 ---
PALM-LIKE PLANTS
Common Name: Sago Palm
Common Name: Dioon
Scientific Name: Cycas revoluta
Scientific Name: Dioon edule
Description: This small, compact plant is not a true palm, Description: This slow-growing cycad develops a rosette
but a cycad. The shiny, dark-green foliage consists of of leaves from a short, cylindrical unbranched stem.
numerous feathery leaves arranged in a flat spiral at The young Dioon has an airy, lacy fern-like quality. As
the top of the heavy black trunk. The plant is slow- plants mature, the leaves become rigid and silvery
growing, producing new leaves only once a year. grey, reminiscent of palm foliage.
Landscape Use: The Sago Palm makes an excellent tub or Landscape Use: Dioon is rich and exotic in character. It is
planter subject. It is effective when combined with excellent as a container plant or for enclosed or partly
other tropical and subtropical plants. Small Sago enclosed garden areas with a tropical theme.
Palms are sometimes used under tall trees in place of
Foliage: Evergreen
ferns.
Climate Zone: (4), 5
Foliage: Evergreen
Height: To 5'
Climate Zone: (4), 5
Light Exposure: Part to full shade
Height: 6'-10'
Spread: 3'-5'
Light Exposure: Part to full shade
Water Use: Medium to high
Spread: 3'-5'
Growth Rate: Slow
Water Use: Medium to high
Trunk Width: 1'
Growth Rate: Slow
Cultural Requirements: Well-drained, fertile, organic soil
Trunk: clumping or single to 1' width
and protection from hottest sun and wind should be
Cultural Requirements: Good quality garden soil and provided for best growth.
regular irrigation encourage best growth and appear-
Problems: Plants may sunburn with full or relected sun,
ance. In zone 5, select a shady planting site.
especially when grown as container plants.
Problems: Plants may sunburn with full to reflected sun
and heat, especially when grown as container plants.
Any products, services, or organizations that are mentioned, shown, or indirectly implied in this publication do not imply
(cid:9)(cid:5)