--- Page 1 ---
Ground Covers
for
Arizona Landscapes
ELIZABETH DAVISON
Lecturer
Department of Plant Sciences
AZ1110
April 1999
--- Page 2 ---
Contents
Why Use a Ground Cover?..........................................................................................................3
Caveats ..........................................................................................................................................3
How to Select a Ground Cover...................................................................................................3
General Planting Instructions......................................................................................................4
Care of Established Plantings.......................................................................................................4
Water.............................................................................................................................................5
Exposure........................................................................................................................................5
Plant Climate (Hardiness) Zones................................................................................................5
Plant Climate Zone Map ..............................................................................................................6
Plant List........................................................................................................................................7
Plant Name Cross Reference.......................................................................................................7
This information has been reviewed by university faculty.
information and other services only to individuals and institutions that function without regard to sex, race, religion, color, national origin, age,
Vietnam Era Veteran’s status, or disability.
--- Page 3 ---
Ground covers are usually creeping, sprawling or How to Select a Ground Cover
clumping plants whose primary function is to cover the
Three basic questions should be considered when
ground in man-made landscapes. They can also include
selecting a ground cover:
low growing shrubs and perennials, if they spread to
cover the area. Plants suitable for this use come in a wide • Will this plant create the desired landscape effect?
range of shapes, sizes, textures and colors. Many bear (Consider mature height, growth habit and growth
attractive flowers that add seasonal beauty to their other rate, texture, color, bloom period, year-round
good characteristics. appearance, etc.)
(cid:127) Will this plant grow well on the site? (Consider soil
Why Use a Ground Cover? type, topography, soil and air drainage, light
exposure, seasonal high and low temperatures.)
Ground covers fill a number of important design needs.
(cid:127) Will this plant make an attractive ground cover with
They can form a low horizontal foliage mass that serves to
the maintenance I can provide? (Consider irrigation
organize or tie a planting together into a unified
and fertilization requirements, pruning, cleaning,
composition. They can soften and add a touch of greenery
pest control, life span and replacement needs.)
to the large rock-mulched areas so often seen in desert
landscapes. Large expanses of paving also seem cooler
and more interesting if beds of ground covers are
The following tables list some of the most useful ground
occasionally substituted for sections of pavement. They
cover species for southern Arizona as well as their
cut glare, suppress dust, and prevent evaporative water
landscape uses and cultural requirements. Several
loss. Ground covers are effective alone or in mixed
precautions should be observed in selecting plants from
plantings near one-story houses, surrounding tall office
this list.
buildings, defining open spaces, and covering highway
(cid:127) Do not choose rampant growing types like
embankments.
Honeysuckle or Algerian Ivy for small or narrow
From an engineering standpoint, ground covers that
spaces.
root along the ground as they grow can control erosion on
steep slopes. They can also reduce the need for mowing (cid:127) Do not choose a high-maintenance type where low
turf on small or odd-shaped areas or on difficult banks or maintenance is desired.
mounds. Because ground covers differ in the amount of (cid:127) Do not assume that edgers and weed eaters will keep
foot traffic they tolerate without injury, they can direct a vigorous species in bounds.
pedestrian traffic around an area rather than inviting it as
(cid:127) Use types under trees that can absorb tree leaves
turf often does.
without the need for raking.
Caveats (cid:127) For erosion control purposes, select ground covers
that root as they spread since these are more effective
Ground covers are rarely maintenance-free, however.
than mat-forming sorts.
Gardeners who are unfamiliar with the general growth
characteristics of ground covers may expect these plants Other important considerations include the following:
to provide a permanent foliage cover once the planting Does the species tends to attract trash or debris (by means
has filled in. Unfortunately, this is often not the case. of thorns or spines or shaggy bark )? Will other plants on
Within two to four years many ground cover beds will the site need care (pruning, etc) with which the ground
develop bare spots or areas of sparse open foliage. This cover will interfere?
may be due to weather, cultural practices, pests or the Many ground covers have an off-season for growth and
gradual change from vigorous young leafy plants to older appearance. Since they are frequently used in a
tougher less densely foliaged plants. prominent position in the foreground, it is best to select
As a result, most ground cover plantings do require the toughest plant available that looks attractive for the
regular care and refurbishing to keep them dense and longest period. Whenever possible, select a ground cover
vigorous. In addition to proper irrigation, fertilization, that is frost-hardy in your area or at least a species that
and pest control, this may involve replanting bare spots recovers quickly from cold injury. Note the discussion of
and pruning old stems to stimulate new growth. the plant hardiness zones, and see the attached Arizona
Nevertheless, some experts feel that 5 years is the map.
maximum life span of a groundcover in the lower Sonoran
Desert areas (Phoenix, Yuma, etc).
Ground Covers for Arizona Landscapes 3
--- Page 4 ---
General Planting instructions longer to complete the planting operation, the first plants
The best planting times are mid-fall and early set out may be dry before the job is finished, especially on
spring. Plants set out in either season will develop a a warm, windy day. To prevent such losses, stop at
good root system before the stress of hot summer regular intervals to water transplants. A mulch of coarse
weather. bark, wood chips, or other mulch materials over the
Ground covers are often used in areas where finished bed will keep the ground cooler, conserve
growing conditions are less than ideal. They may be moisture and discourage weeds.
planted on steep dry slopes in full sun or deep shade. Young ground cover plants are shallow rooted and
In addition, most types grow close to the ground where may need watering every 2 or 3 days for the first two to
they are exposed to a microclimate of exaggerated heat four weeks after planting. When established, the same
or cold. This makes good soil preparation important to plants may require watering every 5 to 10 days in hot dry
weather, but only every 3 to 6 weeks in the winter if
plant establishment and growth.
natural precipitation has been less than normal.
Soil preparation
Care of Established Plantings
Start bed preparation a week or so before you plan to
plant. It is not necessary to add soil amendments if you’ve Irrigation
chosen a species that is adapted to alkaline soils and Many gardeners attempt to establish dense ground
relatively low fertility. Do work the soil to a depth of 12", cover plantings in desert landscapes that receive little or
removing caliche, rocks or debris. no irrigation. This is nearly impossible to accomplish,
Plan to mulch the area after planting with 3" of bark even with drought-tolerant species. The nature of the
(which will eventually break down and improve soil desert is such that vegetation is scattered with areas of
structure and nutrition) or 1-2" of decomposed granite. open ground in between. Low water-use ground covers
Water the cleaned bed to a depth of 12" several days will assume a similar growth pattern if they must survive
before planting. and grow with natural precipitation only. So
Space ground cover plants in a new bed so that they will supplemental irrigation is required for a solid foliage
cover the site in one or two growing seasons, and yet have cover even with arid plant types.
room to expand to full size. Closer spacing can reduce There are several irrigation systems that will work
weed control problems and usually results in a smoother efficiently to provide water to a ground cover bed that’s
cover, but by the third year, the plants may be level or on a slight incline. Soaker hoses, drip irrigation, or
overcrowded. micro-sprays will keep the water near the soil level — not
Set the plants at the same depth as they were growing in on the foliage. Whatever the system used, apply water
the container and firm backfill soil around the roots only as rapidly as the soil will absorb it. It may be
without crushing the rootball. On banks and slopes, plant necessary to irrigate for several brief periods with time
slightly higher than grade, leaving a shallow basin on the between each cycle to moisten the entire root zone
downhill side of each plant to catch irrigation/rain water. without wasteful surface run-off. The watering schedule
In the mid to low desert parts of Arizona, bermudagrass should be separate from the turf schedule.
is a prime cause of failure in planting and maintaining Watering ground covers on slopes often includes
ground cover beds. It is not impossible to control if the surface run-off and poor infiltration of moisture to the
bed can be kept clean until a solid planting exists. depth of plant roots. A drip irrigation system is perhaps
Bermudagrass is less likely to invade once ground covers
the most efficient way to water ground covers on slopes.
fill in the bare spaces between plants. Chemical herbicides
are available for establishing a relatively weed-free
Weeding
planting site. (In most cases however, two or more
Bermudagrass often invades ground cover beds in
treatments must be made during summer to rid an area of
summer when outdoor gardening activity is reduced.
existing bermudagrass. This must be considered in
Once well-established, this aggressive grass is difficult to
deciding when to set out a new bed in a bermudagrass
eradicate without also destroying part or all of the ground
area. More information under “Weeding.”)
cover. Removing even small infestations from tender
brittle ground cover species is impractical because of the
Watering the new plants
difficulty in getting out on the bed without damaging
Tender young ground cover nursery stock dies plants. This is why it is so important to eliminate
quickly if allowed to dry out on the planting site. It is bermudagrass before planting a new bed. There are
important that plants be watered thoroughly a short time several chemical means to control grasses in broadleaf
before being removed from growing containers and groundcover beds. Mulch at least 2" deep will help slow
placed in the ground. Irrigate the cultivated bed area down grass invasion. Check established plantings
several days before planting so that the transplants will be regularly for the appearance of bermudagrass and take
set out in moist soil. Since it may take several hours or
immediate steps to get rid of any that is found.
--- Page 5 ---
Fertilizing Explanation of cultural requirements used in the
Since ground cover plants grow in close competition ground cover tables:
for nutrients, they should be fertilized regularly to
maintain good leaf color, yet moderate growth. Water
Overfertilization results in excessive growth that requires Heavy (cid:1) Plants thrive in or adjoining lawn conditions
more work to maintain and keep presentable. Fertilize which infers that upper root zone is kept moderately
established ground cover planting at least once each year moist at all times.
in late winter or early spring. A second application in
early fall may be needed to maintain good color and Medium (cid:1)(cid:2) Plants thrive with deep irrigations spaced 7-
growth, though the resultant lush growth is more 14 days apart depending on season and type. Surface
susceptible to frost damage. layer of soil may dry out but adequate moisture levels are
Nitrogen is usually the key element which must be always maintained in deeper root zones.
supplied. The percent by weight of nitrogen in a fertilizer
is indicated by the first number in the analysis, such as Light (cid:1) Plants tolerate long dry periods but must be
20–10–5, 16–20–0, etc. This information is printed watered deeply on an occasional basis to grow or develop.
somewhere on the fertilizer bag. A typical fertilizer This group includes most of the true desert trees and
recommendation for mature ground covers is two pounds shrubs. Poor drainage often causes problems for these
of ammonium sulfate (21–0–0) or other garden fertilizer
plants.
of similar nitrogen content per 100 square feet. Apply the
fertilizer uniformly when the foliage is dry. Then water
Exposure
thoroughly to wash off any fertilizer particles lodged in
Shade (cid:1)(cid:2)Area receives no direct sunlight such as under a
the plant foliage and to move the nutrients into the plant
roof or dense tree canopy. There is a range between deep
root zone.
shade such as under a solid roof and open shade - for
example the situation found on the shadow side of a tall
Pruning and Deadheading
building where the sun never penetrates and yet there is
Ground covers are generally more attractive if open sky above.
pruned back each year in late winter or early spring. Wait
till danger of frost is over before cutting back tender Partial shade (cid:1) Situation under trees where there is a
species. The appearance of the planting will usually serve dappled sun and shade light pattern or a situation where
as a guide for scheduling pruning work. To encourage a there are a few hours of sunlight early or late in the day.
ground cover bed to recover quickly fertilize and irrigate Late afternoon sun is more intense and is usually
after pruning is done. accompanied by a heat build-up. Plant requiring part
Rapid-growing types may need trimming two or three shade often do not thrive in such a situation.
times during the growing season. The need for artificially
shearing a planting can be an indication of the wrong Full sun (cid:1)(cid:2) Area receives direct unobstructed sunlight for
plant in the wrong place! If a plant continues to over-run more than a half of a day. There is a range between direct
a sidewalk area, remove it and allow more space for sun and reflected sun where planting areas close to walls
neighboring plants, rather than repeatedly edging the facing south or west are much hotter. These situations may
offending plant. limit the use of certain plants which are sensitive to
Flowering species will continue to bloom if the spent
reflected heat.
flowers or seed pods are removed. This procedure is
called deadheading. In other cases, the flowers or fruits
Plant Climate (Hardiness) Zones
could attract wildlife that may invade the bed. Although
In the following plant descriptions, three climate
this deadheading chore can be difficult and time-
zones are used to give some idea of species adaptation
consuming, ground cover growth and vigor will be
based on cold hardiness. Communities in each zone
improved.
might vary slightly from one another. Plants considered
marginal for the zone seldom survive in the cooler sites
except in very protected locations. Within the zone, those
communities with milder climates allow the marginal
plants to be grown with reasonable success. Remember
too, that these climate zones grade into one another near
their boundaries, with a corresponding effect on plant-
performance.
Ground Covers for Arizona Landscapes 5
--- Page 6 ---
Experienced desert gardeners know that Zone 4:
microclimate effects (elevation, exposure, air drainage, Mid-Altitude Desert (cid:1) (Elevation 2,000-3,500 feet)
heat radiation from buildings and paving, etc.) can create (typical minimums: 10 to 20o F) Point-of-reference
a significantly cooler or warmer environment for plants. communities: Ajo, Safford, Tucson, Wickenberg.
The microclimates found within your own landscape may
determine whether or not you can grow a given tree or
Zone5:
shrub in a particular location.
Low Altitude Desert (cid:1) (Elevation 1,000-2,000 feet)
(typical minimums: 20 to 30o F) Point-of-reference
Zone 3
communities: Buckeye, Casa Grande, Chandler, Florence,
High Altitude Desert (cid:1) (Elevation 3,500-5,000 feet) Gila Bend, Parker, Phoenix, Yuma.
(typical minimums: O to 10o F) Point-of-reference
communities: Benson, Bisbee, Clifton, Douglas, Globe, X = Hardy
Kingman, Natural Bridge, Nogales, Sedona, Sierra Vista,
M = Marginal but recovers quickly from frost injury
Tombstone.
--- Page 7 ---
n e s
Pl a d n e t s n c a r m i pt e i o a n U s e s C o m m e nt s H ei g ht G r o wt h r at e Pl a nti n g d H i st a a r n d c i n e s s z o Li n g e ht e x p o s u W r e at e r
Acacia redolens Erosion control Cultivars vary widely in 1-3’ Fast 5'-8' 4X, 5X
PROSTRATE ACACIA on slopes, level height. Can collect trash
areas
Low growing, prostrate
arching shrub with dull
gray-green foliage. Yellow
puff-ball flowers in spring.
Ajuga reptens Small spaces in Not a sun lover in the 1' Slow 1' 3X, 4X
CARPET BUGLE partial sun or desert. Subject to root
shady nooks, knot nematodes, fungus
Shiny green or copper mini-oasis in where drainage is poor.
foliage; erect spikes of deep Zone 4 Shallow rooted, requires
regular watering.
blue blossoms in spring.
Asparagus densiflorus Level areas, low Partial shade, chlorotic 1' - 2' Medium 2' 3M, 4X,
‘Sprengeri’ banks, planter in full sun near lawns; 5X
SPRENGER boxes, hanging for lush green growth
pots can be cut to ground in
ASPARAGUS
early spring or after
freezing.
Arching trailing stems.
Light green needle-like
foliage, red berries.
Atriplex semibaccata Desert shrub and Fire resistant, erosion 1' - 2' Slow 3' - 4' 4X, 5X
AUSTRALIAN ground cover control. Stands alkaline
SALTBUSH soil; reseeds or natural-
izes. Prone to fungus in
dense mature plantings.
Dense, low-growing shrub
with grey-green foliage
Carpobrotus, Drosanthemum, Sunny slopes, Well drained soil; < 1' Medium 1' 3M, 4X,
Malephora, others mounds and drought resistant but to fast 5X
ICE PLANT beds may freeze back in very
cold winter (Zone 3) or
dry down in summer
Trailing succulent stems;
heat (Zone 5). No
fleshy green-grey leaves;
traffic. Bermuda
orange, yellow or red
invasions can be a
daisy-like flowers in spring
problem
and summer.
Baccharis x ‘Centennial’ Fairly dry areas; Prune once a year; 2-3 ft Medium 3-4’ 4X, 5X
DESERT BROOM beds, slopes, subject to damping off
HYBRID desert landscapes in late summer. Allow
to dry between summer
irrigations.
Dense, ground hugging
green-grey foliage
Ground Covers for Arizona Landscapes 7
--- Page 8 ---
n e s
Pl a d n e t s n c a r m i pt e i o a n U s e s C o m m e nt s H ei g ht G r o wt h r at e Pl a nti n g di H st a a r n d c i n e s s z L o i g n h e t e x p o s u W r e at e r
Baileya multiradiata Colorful desert Long bloom period. 1’ Medium scatter 3X, 4X,
DESERT annual. Use in Reseeds itself but will seeds 5X
MARIGOLD naturalized areas. not make a solid cover
Soft, silvery grey foliage in a
clump, bright yellow
blossoms in spring
Calylophus hartwegii Small beds w/ Dormant in winter in 1' Medium 3-4' 3X, 4X,
CALYLOPHUS, SUN shrubs and cacti colder areas. Good 5X
DROPS drainage a must.
Many unbranched stems;
low growing, yellow
flowers at sunset in spring ,
summer. Spreads by
rhizomes.
Convolvulus mauritanicus Small beds, Tolerates dry, poor soil, 1' Fast 3' 3X, 4X,
GROUND slopes needs good drainage. Do 5X
MORNING GLORY not overwater! Cut back
if it becomes too strag-
gly. Blooms over a long
Low mounded mass of soft
season, though is rarely
green-grey foliage; lavender
long-lived.
blue trumpet shaped
flowers, spring to early fall.
Convolvulus cneorum Small beds, Tolerates dry, poor soil, 2' Medium 4' 3X, 4X,
BUSH MORNING slopes needs good drainage. 5X
GLORY
Low mounding bush with
silvery foliage, white
flowers w/ yellow centers
bloom spring and fall.
Cotoneaster glaucophyllus Planter boxes Tolerates heat and 3' Medium 3' 3X, 4X,
BRIGHT BEAD and beds, where drought, but needs 5X
COTONEASTER a low shrub mass protection from worst
is needed, low sun in Zone 5; Texas root
borders and rot a problem, particu-
Erect, arching growth;
slopes larly if planter is small
oval, green-grey foliage;
and heats up.
flowers are pink followed
by many red fruits.
Dalea greggii Spreads rapidly where 1.5' Fast 4' - 5' 4X, 5X
TRAILING INDIGO stems contact ground.
BUSH
Mounding low shrub.
Graceful arching stems, soft
gray foliage. Lavender
flowers in spring.
--- Page 9 ---
n e s
Pl a d n e t s n c a r m i pt e i o a n U s e s C o m m e nt s H ei g ht G r o wt h r at e Pl a nti n g d H i st a a r n d c i n e s s z o Li n g e ht e x p o s u W r e at e r
Dalea capitata Slopes, beds with Needs good drainage. 1'-2' fast 4' 3X, 4X,
GOLD DALEA shrubs Not for deep shade. 5X
Takes reflected heat.
Low mounding form, fine
dark green leaves with
lemony scent, yellow
flowers in fall.
Euonymus fortunei ‘Colorata’ Large beds and Foliage a little sparse in 2’ Fast 4' 3X, 4X
PURPLE LEAF slopes, good to winter (Zone 3).
WINTERCREEPER naturalize among Sensitive to full sun in
boulders; will low desert summers.
climb masonry No foot traffic. Subject
Mounding vine, dark green
walls to Texas Root Rot.
foliage; foliage turning
reddish purple in winter
Gazania hybrids Sunny beds and May need some refur- 1' Fast 1.5’ 3M, 4X,
CLUMPING GAZANIA borders, gentle bishing replacement 5X
slopes every fall; Prone to
fungus.
Herbaceous perennial, grey-
green foliage in rosettes or
clumps. 2” daisy-like flowers
in a variety of colors, mostly
spring and fall.
Gazania rigens leucolaena Level beds and Needs good soil 1' Fast 2’ 4M, 5X
TRAILING GAZANIA banks drainage; subject to
damping off in late
summer. Mature
Gray creeping perennial;
plantings should be
daisy-like flowers, white,
thinned annually.
yellow, orange, and bronze
blossoms spring and fall.
Gelsemium sempervirens Good in large Long and sprawling 2' - 3' medium 4’ - 6' 3X, 4X,
CAROLINA JESSAMINE areas. stems, makes better 5X
cover if pegged down;
may crawl over shrubs,
Twining woody vine; dark
subject to chlorosis in
green foliage; fragrant
wet places.
tubular yellow flowers
spring through fall.
Hedera canariensis Grows well in Not a great choice. 1' Me- 2' 3X, 4X,
ALGERIAN IVY large areas; will Burns out in full sun. dium to 5X
cover walls & Needs fertile well fast
fences drained soils. Will
Long runners; large, rich
damp off in heat.
green leaves, variegated
forms available
Ground Covers for Arizona Landscapes 9
--- Page 10 ---
n e s
Pl a d n e t s n c a r m i pt e i o a n U s e s C o m m e nt s H ei g ht G r o wt h r at e Pl a nti n g di H st a a r n d c i n e s s z L o i g n h e t e x p o s u W r e at e r
Hymenoxys acaulis Small areas, Good for open spaces, 1' Fast 2 - 3' 3X, 4X,
ANGELITA DAISY borders transition zone in 5X
Xeriscapes. Blooms
nearly continuously.
Small clumping gray-green
Needs deadheading
pine-like foliage, yellow
flowers
Juniperus sp. (Many species Banks, edging, Low types more vulner- 2' - 3' Medium 3' - 5' 3X, 4X
and cultivars) beds, planter able to Bermuda
PROSTRATE JUNIPER boxes invasion. Do not use in
small areas where edges
must be excessively
Flat, prostrate or mounded
pruned — spoils its
growth habit depending on
natural form. Likes to be
variety; dark to light blue-
washed off regularly,
green foliage
helps eliminate spider
mite problems. Prone to
sun damage in exposed
locations Zone 5.
Lantana montevidensis Flat areas or Leaves die back 30 1' Medium 2' 3M,
TRAILING LANTANA slopes degrees F; stems hardier; to fast 4X, 5X
may give color all winter
Arching trailing branches; in a protected location.
lavender flowers, clusters Cut back in early spring.
over long period Responds well to iron.
Lantana camara (several Flat areas or Hardier than trailing 1' - 2' Medium 3' - 4' 4X, 5X
yellow and white cultivars) slopes lantana, but enjoys to fast
GOLD LANTANA severe pruning as
growth starts in spring.
Prostrate form of bush
lantana; horizontal stems,
brilliant yellow flowers
blooming intermittently
spring through fall.
Liriope spicata Part shade or Not a great choice since 1' Medium 2' 3X, 4X,
CREEPING LILY TURF mini-oasis area. leaf tips often turn 5X
brown in salty soil or
Dense, grass-like ground with low relative
cover; pale lilac-white humidity.
flower; spikes barely taller
than leaves.
Lonicera japonica ‘Halliana’ Loose billowy Can climb nearby trees 1-3’ Fast 2-3’ 3X, 4X,
JAPANESE cover for banks and shrubs creating a 5X
HONEYSUCKLE and steep slopes; maintenance problem.
roots in as it
spreads—good
Evergreen vine; fragrant
cover on wire
tubular flowers, white
fences
changing to yellow in spring
and summer
--- Page 11 ---
n e s
Pl a d n e t s n c a r m i pt e i o a n U s e s C o m m e nt s H ei g ht G r o wt h r at e Pl a nti n g d H i st a a r n d c i n e s s z o Li n g e ht e x p o s u W r e at e r
Melampodium leucanthum Low-growing Semi-perennial—needs 1' Medium 2'- 3' 4X, 5X
BLACK FOOT DAISY wildflower look replacing from time to
in arid or time
Spreading, low growing transition zones.
clump. White daisy-like
flower bloom intermittently
spring through fall.
Myoporum parvifolium Slight slopes, No foot traffic. Do not 1' Fast 5' - 6' 4X, 5X
MYOPORUM large open areas. crowd plants. Rarely
roots on contact with
Spreading, low growing; soil.
rich green foliage w/ small
white flowers.
Good for dry Perennial which needs 1' Fast 2' 3X, 4X,
Oenothera speciosa
slopes; parking little care once estab- 5X
MEXICAN EVENING
strips lished. Invasive if not
PRIMROSE
controlled; has under-
ground runners; cut
During spring bloom bears a back to ground early
profusion of rose-pink 1.5” spring and cut back
flowers, which close after again after bloom.
dark. Needs good drainage.
Flea beetles can be
problem.
Oenothera caespitosa Good for dry May be short lived, but 1' Fast 1.5' 3X, 4X,
WHITE EVENING slopes; parking spreads by seed. Watch 5X
PRIMROSE strips, smaller for flea beetles.
beds under
shrubs
Dark green leaves in
rosettes; exceptionally large
white flowers that bloom at
dusk, spring through fall.
Oenothera stubbei Good for dry Spreads by above 1' Fast 3' 4X, 5X
SALTILLO EVENING slopes; parking ground runner. Needs
PRIMROSE strips, smaller afternoon shade. May
beds under be cut back after winter.
shrubs
Rosettes of bright green
leaves; 2" yellow flowers
bloom spring through fall.
Ophiopogan japonicus Good in poorly Somewhat oriental in 1' Slow 1' 3X, 4X,
MONDO GRASS lit atriums; good appearance, slow to fill 5X
around boulders, in, leaf tips often turn
in a shady brown in salty soil.
Clumps of dark green
protected spot or
foliage in mounds; lilac
mini-oasis.
blossoms, blue fruit—
concealed by foliage
Ground Covers for Arizona Landscapes 11
--- Page 12 ---
n e s
Pl a d n e t s n c a r m i pt e i o a n U s e s C o m m e nt s H ei g ht G r o wt h r at e Pl a nti n g di H st a a r n d c i n e s s z L o i g n h e t e x p o s u W r e at e r
Osteospermum fruticosum Sunny areas, Prune back in late winter 1' Fast 2'-3' 4X, 5X
TRAILING AFRICAN sloping bank if leggy; pinch to
DAISY cover, also encourage branching;
hanging baskets purple form is hardier
than white hybrid
Long runners, light green
‘African Queen’; dies out
fleshy leaves, 3” daisy-like
in spots. Replant bare
blossoms
spots spring or fall.
Rosmarinus prostratus Sunny banks, Good transition from 1-2’ Fast 2' - 3' 3X, 4X,
DWARF ROSEMARY slopes and desert to cultivated 5X
planters plants; must be pruned
regularly to prevent
Arching, creeping stems;
woodiness. Prevent
dark green narrow leaves;
Bermuda invasion.
small blue flowers in winter
Spittle bugs can be
and spring
problem.
Santolina chamaecyparissus Low border or Good desert transition. 1' - 2' Medium 2' - 3' 3X, 4X,
SANTOLINA ground cover, Prune to prevent 5X
small areas woodiness; summer—
prune to prevent seed
Dense mat of fine textured
heads
green-grey foliage; yellow
button-like blossoms in
summer
Santolina virens Low borders or Striking texture and 1' - 2' Medium 2' 3X, 4X,
GREEN SANTOLINA ground cover; color; replace if woody 5X
small areas
Mounding, dense green
foliage; flowers in the
summer
Sedum sp. (Many) Small beds, low Many kinds available. 1' Medium 1'-2' 3X, 4X,
SEDUM, STONECROP banks and Bird and rodents a to fast 5X
mounds problem. Hard to weed
because plant is brittle
Mostly creeping plants with
and succulent leaves
thick succulent leaves; small
crush underfoot. Needs
blossoms of various colors
part shade in low desert
but mostly yellow
(Zone 5)
Teucrium chamaedrys Compact edging Takes sun, heat, poor 1' Medium 1' - 2' 3M,
‘Prostratum’ or ground cover; soil; soil must drain 4X, 5X
PROSTRATE good with stones well; cut back in late
and railroad ties winter to renew growth
GERMANDER
Dense dark green foliage,
spreads by stolons; rose-
purple flowers in summer
--- Page 13 ---
n e s
Pl a d n e t s n c a r m i pt e i o a n U s e s C o m m e nt s H ei g ht G r o wt h r at e Pl a nti n g d H i st a a r n d c i n e s s z o Li n g e ht e x p o s u W r e at e r
Trachelospermum jasminoides Informal beds, Afternoon shade 1' - 2' Medium 2' 3M, 4X,
STAR JASMINE planter boxes required below 2000’ 5X
elevation; will climb
nearby shrubs and trees;
Loose mounding vine; shiny
slow to establish from
dark-green foliage; fragrant
small liners; chlorotic in
1” white flowers in spring
poorly drained soils.
Verbena peruviana Bed, borders, Hybrids available in <1' Fast 2' 3M, 4X,
PERUVIAN VERBENA planters several colors; long 5X
blooming season.
Ground-hugging, dark
green foliage; flowers pink
to white, bloom spring to
fall.
Verbena gooddingii Bed, borders, Needs extra water in 1' Me- 2' 3X, 4X,
GOODING’S VERBENA planters summer. Short lived. dium 5X
Soft green foliage, masses of
lavender flowers in spring.
Verbena rigida Bed, borders, Spreads by seed, can 1' Fast 3' 3M, 4X,
SANDPAPER VERBENA planters become invasive 5X
Upright, stiff rough foliage;
dark purple flowers in
spring.
Vinca major Slopes, banks, May be sheared late in 1' Fast 1' 3X, 4X,
BLUE PERIWINKLE level areas; winter; a variegated 5X
planter boxes; form is available.
Trailing stem; shiny dark- under trees Chlorotic in full sun
green foliage; lavender-blue with heavy irrigation.
flowers in spring
Wedelia trilobata Shady beds, Not for full sun in 1' Fast 2' - 3M, 4X,
WEDELIA mini-oasis areas. desert (Zones 4, 5). 3' 5X
Needs room to Rampant growth if
Dark green foliage on spread. conditions are right.
flexible stems that root
where they contact the soil;
yellow daisy-like flowers
bloom spring through fall.
Ground Covers for Arizona Landscapes 13
--- Page 14 ---
Groundcovers in the table are arranged alphabetically by scientific name. Following
are the equivalent Latin names for the common name that may be more familiar:
Algerian ivy Hedera canariensis
Angelita daisy Hymenoxys acaulis
Australian saltbush Atriplex semibaccata
Bush morning glory Convolvulus cneorum
Black foot daisy Melampodium leucanthum
Blue periwinkle Vinca major
Bright bead cotoneaster Cotoneaster glaucophyllus
Carolina jessamine Gelsemium sempervirens
Carpet bugle Ajuga reptens
Clumping gazania Gazania hybrids
Creeping lily turf Liriope spicata
Desert broom hybrid Baccharis x ‘Centennial’
Desert marigold Baileya multiradiata
Dwarf rosemary Rosmarinus prostratus
Gold dalea Dalea capitata
Gold lantana Lantana camara
Gooding’s verbena Verbena goodingii
Green santolina Santolina virens
Ground morning glory Convolvulus mauritanicus
Ice plant Carpobrotus, etc.
Japanese honeysuckle Lonicera japonica ‘Halliana’
Mexican evening primrose Oenothera speciosa
Mondo grass Ophiopogon japonicus
Myoporum Myoporum parvifolium
Peruvian verbena Verbena peruviana
Prostrate acacia Acacia redolens
Prostrate Juniper Juniperus
Prostrate Germander Teucrium chamaedrys ‘Prostratum’
Purple leaf wintercreeper Euonymus fortunei ‘Colorata’
Saltillo evening primrose Oenothera stubbei
Sandpaper verbena Verbena rigida
Santolina Santolina chamaecyparissus
Sedum, Stonecrop Sedum
Sprenger asparagus Asparagus densiflorus ’Sprengeri’
Sundrops, Calylophus Calylophus hartwegii
Trailing indigo bush Dalea greggii
Trailing gazania Gazania rigens leucolaena
Trailing lantana Lantana montevidensis
Trailing African daisy Osteospermum fruiticosum
Wedelia Wedelia trilobata
White evening primrose Oenothera caespitosa
Any products, services, or organizations that are mentioned, shown, or indirectly implied in this publication do not imply