--- Page 1 ---
ARIZONA COOPERATIVE
E TENSION
AZ1429 Revised 04/12
Mesquite and Palo Verde Trees
for the Urban Landscape
Ursula K. Schuch and Jack J. Kelly
Mesquite
Mesquite trees are members of the genus Prosopis and is renowned for its unique southwestern flavor. This has
the Fabaceae (legume or bean) family. Because of their taken its toll on some of the oldest and largest trees in the
attractiveness and drought tolerance, they are one of the wild. Bees produce a fine quality honey from the mesquite
“backbone” plants of many xeriscape plantings. They flowers.
tolerate most soils with good drainage and grow well in full
to reflected sun as well as in partial shade. They range in
Mesquite Species and Hybrids
size from shrubs to large trees that grow to over 30 feet (10
meters) in height. They are native to North America, South Prosopis alba (Argentine mesquite)
America, Africa, India, and the Middle East.
In Arizona, native mesquites grow along dry stream beds,
in washes, flood plains, along rivers, on plains and hillsides,
and in grasslands. Where water is not a limiting growth
factor, the trees reach their true majestic size. At elevations
above 5000 feet (1525 meters) their growth is retarded due
to cold and plants may appear as low growing shrubs.
All mesquites are heat tolerant and grow rapidly during
hot weather provided there is adequate water available.
Mesquites are deciduous, and foliage is shed in response to
cold temperatures and prolonged drought conditions.
The different species of mesquite can be distinguished
by tree form, size, shape, and bark characteristics, but
foliage is particularly useful in determining the species.
Figure 1: Leaf of Prosopis alba
Line drawings of leaves for the mesquite species discussed
accompany the descriptions of the plants (Fig. 1 – 6, and 8).
The mature height and spread of this species may
Leaves are bipinnate, meaning that leaflets are arranged
be 20 – 50 feet (6 – 16 meters). Argentine mesquite has
along a central axis (pinna) similar to a feather, and each leaf
been misidentified as Chilean mesquite for many years.
has one or several pairs of pinnae. Flowers of all mesquites
Argentine mesquite is characterized by airy blue-green
are catkin-like and develop into seed pods of various shapes
foliage on sometimes spiny stems (Fig. 1). The tree may
and sizes.
have thorns or may be thornless. It becomes leafless after
Historically, mesquite wood has been used by early the first hard freeze of winter and is typically dormant for
peoples as a source of food, building materials and firewood. 6 – 8 weeks. When planted at elevations below 2500 feet
A nutritious meal is made from ground mesquite seed pods (762 meters), it may remain semi-evergreen through the
which helped sustain early Native Americans. Owing to winter. If the winter is exceptionally mild, leaf drop may
the high protein content of the seeds, shoots and pods, it not occur until March which coincides with the first flush
is an important food for range cattle. Currently there is a of new growth. Leaves of Argentine mesquite have 1 – 3
resurgence in the manufacture of mesquite furniture and pairs of pinnae each with 25 – 50 pairs of leaflets. Flowers
flooring due to the natural beauty of the wood, its intricate are catkin-like 2 – 3 inches (5 – 8 cm) long and pale yellow,
grain, coloration and durability. Many trees are converted followed by 3 – 5 inch (8 – 12 cm) long seed pods which
into charcoal and are sold as a favorite barbecue wood that ripen in July and August.
--- Page 2 ---
Prosopis chilensis (Chilean mesquite) trunk is tan and smooth when young but becomes rougher
and darker as the tree matures. Texas honey mesquite is
native to the southwestern U.S. including Texas, Oklahoma,
Kansas and into northern Mexico.
Due to its ornamental popularity, several selections
have been made for foliage, form and thornlessness. These
cultivars are vegetatively propagated to insure the integrity
of the clone. Texas honey mesquites require well drained
soil and tolerate full sun or partial sun. Once established,
plants irrigated monthly develop into larger trees with a
dense canopy.
Figure 2: Leaf of Prosopis chilensis
This mesquite is characterized by a lacy crown of blue-
green foliage on spiny stems (Fig. 2). Spines may be up
to 2 inches (5 cm) in length which may limit its use in
residential or high traffic areas. The trunk is typically dark
brown and fissured. In the low and mid-desert, below
2,500 feet (762 meters), the tree will lose most of its foliage
except in years of mild winter temperatures when foliage
may remain on the tree until March. Old leaves do not fall
from the tree until new growth is well underway. During
cold winters the tree will be dormant and leafless for 6
– 8 weeks during winter. New foliage will appear in late
March or early April and is fern-like and a beautiful light Figure 4: Leaf of Prosopis glandulosa var. torreyana
green. Leaves are characterized by 1 – 3 pairs of pinnae
each with 10 – 29 pairs of widely spaced leaflets. Flowers
are 1 – 3 inches (2.5 - 7.6 cm) in length and light yellow.
Flowers are followed by 2 – 5 inch (5 – 13 cm) bean pods P. glandulosa var. torreyana is similar in character to Texas
that ripen in July. honey mesquite, but has smaller leaves with one pair of
pinnae and 8 – 24 pairs of leaflets per pinna (Fig. 4). It is
Prosopis glandulosa var. glandulosa (Texas honey mesquite) native to west Texas, California, New Mexico and parts of
Arizona and Mexico. This variety can sometimes be found
in nurseries.
Prosopis nigra (Black mesquite, Algarrobo negro)
Figure 3: Leaf of Prosopis glandulosa var. glandulosa
This attractive ornamental tree grows to a mature height
of 15 – 30 feet (5 – 10 meters) and is characterized by its
weeping habit and shiny foliage which resembles Schinus
molle (California pepper tree). It has small reddish thorns
and creamy white flowers. Leaves have 1 – 2 pairs of pinnae
with 6 – 17 pairs of secondary leaflets per pinna (Fig. 3). The Figure 5: Leaf of Prosopis nigra
--- Page 3 ---
P. nigra is native to Argentina, Paraguay and parts of Prosopis velutina (Velvet mesquite)
Uruguay. It resembles P. alba in many respects and has
very similar form and foliage (Fig. 5). The leaflets of P. nigra
are closely packed in dark green compound leaves. Leaves
have 1 – 3 pairs of pinnae with 20 – 30 pairs of leaflets per
pinna. Trunk color is dark brown to black. Unlike many
members of the Prosopis genus, black mesquite is evergreen
under most conditions. The plant form is quite variable
and may be heavily thorned. With deep soil and adequate
moisture the tree may grow to 30 feet (10 meters) in height
and width. It will tolerate being grown in irrigated turf
areas and full-sun exposure. The wood is prized because
of its beautiful brown streaking and is used to make
furniture and barrels. Flowers are typical catkin-like up to
2.5 inches (6 cm) long and yellow, and are followed by seed
pods that are 4 – 6 inches (10 – 15 cm) long and are often
streaked with pink. P. nigra is currently underused as it
is not commonly available in the trade, although it is an
excellent tree for the low and mid-elevation desert.
Prosopis pubescens (Screwbean mesquite, Tornillo)
Figure 7: Prosopis velutina in winter (above) and spring
(below)
Figure 6: Leaf and seed pod of Prosopis pubescens
Screwbean mesquite grows to about 25 feet (7.6 meters)
with an equal spread. P. pubescens is native to the Sonoran
and Chihuahuan deserts in parts of southern Arizona,
Texas, and New Mexico. The tree is characterized by
unique seed pods that appear as a tightly wound spring or
a screw, hence the common name (Fig. 6). “Tornillo” means
screw in Spanish. The tree is typically multi-stemmed and
the bark on older branches is shaggy, flaky and easily
peels from the tree. Typical form of the tree is vase-like,
very open and spreading. The leaves are smaller than the
other mesquites described above and are characterized by
one pair of pinnae with 5 – 9 pairs of leaflets per pinna. Figure 8: Leaf and seed pod of Prosopis velutina
Each leaflet is approximately 3/8 to 1 inch (1 – 2.5 cm) in
length (Fig. 6). The small ¾ inch (2 cm) spines are whitish, Mature size of velvet mesquite is 30 – 50 feet (9 – 15 meters)
slender and appear as pairs along the branches. Catkin- height and spread (Fig. 7) when grown with adequate water
like flowers are bright yellow. This tree grows very slowly and in deep soils. Growth rate is slow to moderate but
without irrigation. moderate to rapid under irrigation. Velvet mesquite is
--- Page 4 ---
native from central and southern Arizona into Mexico. It Culture
grows as a shrub on dry rocky upland sites but will grow
All mesquites are very tolerant of hot south and west-
much larger under ideal conditions. This tree may be
facing walls, are valuable trees in parks or large public
found as a single-stemmed tree in bosques (thickets) or as
areas, and are an asset in low water-use landscapes. They
a multi-stemmed tree in open areas. The bark is fissured,
may be planted in groups or as solitary specimens and
dark brown and rough. The wood is prized for furniture
add a lush appearance to the landscape. Mesquites are
because of its unique coloration and intricate grain. Trees
well suited to heat, low humidity, alkaline and poor soils.
may grow up to 4 feet (1.2 meters) in trunk diameter and
Mesquite trees are not well suited as street trees due to their
live for several hundred years. Velvet mesquite foliage is
multi-trunk character. The cold tolerance of many species
covered with dense short gray hairs that cover most parts
has been established but this tolerance is quite variable
of a younger plant (Fig. 8).
owing to the condition of the plant at the onset of winter.
Filtered shade from velvet mesquites is light and often Heavily fertilized and irrigated trees will not tolerate the
serves as a nurse tree for other slower growing plants such cold as well as those that have been conditioned with less
as cactus and shrubs. Leaves have one or two pairs of water and no fertilizer late in the summer. Honey mesquite
pinnae (Fig. 8) with 12 – 30 pairs of leaflets each. In late (Prosopis glandulosa) and screwbean mesquite (P. pubescens)
fall or early winter after the first hard freeze, the gray- can survive temperatures to 0 ºF (–18 ºC); velvet mesquite
green, fine textured leaflets turn light green or tan and fall (P. velutina) is reliably cold hardy to at least 10 ºF (–12 ºC);
from the tree revealing a beautifully sculptured trunk and Chilean mesquite (P. chilensis) and black mesquite (P. nigra)
scaffold branches. In spring two to three inch (5 – 7.5 cm) are hardy to at least 15 ºF (–9 ºC); Argentine mesquite (P.
long cream-colored flowers adorn the tree followed by alba) and many South American hybrids suffer damage
tan seed pods which ripen in mid to late summer. Young and dieback when temperatures fall below 15 – 20 ºF (–9 to
velvet mesquites have small thorns which become less –7 ºC). Where there is abundant water present, mesquite
problematic as the tree matures. Velvet mesquite trees are specimens will be largest when grown in deep, uniform,
drought tolerant yet will flourish with moderate irrigation. sandy soils in and along streambeds, and alluvial plains.
They may become unstable due to rapid crown growth With proper irrigation, these trees will grow satisfactorily
and a limited root system in lawn conditions. on any well drained soil.
Hybrid mesquites Problems
Mesquites cross-pollinate quite readily and as a
result there are a group of plants that are simply called
“hybrid mesquites”. They are often the result of natural
hybridization of Prosopis alba (Argentine mesquite), P.
chilensis (Chilean mesquite) and native P. velutina. Because
of this hybridization, it is almost impossible to obtain pure
species seed. Most hybrids are typically fast-growing,
attractive, thorny or thornless, may have delicate blue
green or green foliage or may have small leaves and have
intermediate characteristics of the above described species.
Many of the hybrid mesquite leaves persist until the new
growth begins in spring, giving the tree an almost evergreen
appearance. These hybrids are often sold in the trade as
“Chilean” mesquite or “South American Hybrids”.
Hybrid mesquites are noted for their rapid growth and
can attain a mature height of 9 – 40 feet (3 – 13 meters) with Figure 9. True mistletoe aerial shoots with berries.
a spread of up to 30 feet (9 meters). They make an excellent
large shade tree but given their size, are often unsuited There are few problems of mesquites. Mistletoe
for the smaller yards found in newer subdivisions. Many (Phoradendron californicum) can be a nuisance or develop
homeowners seek out the thornless hybrids and as a result, into a more serious problem for heavily infested trees.
selections of trees having no thorns and superior structural True mistletoe contains chlorophyll and carries on
and aesthetic characteristics have been made. To preserve photosynthesis, but being a parasite it also lives off the
these characteristics, trees either are grown from cuttings, nutrients of the host plant (Fig. 9). It can develop into
are air layered, or are grafted. Thorns, which are modified plants that are several feet in diameter. Mistletoes may be a
leaves, often disappear as the tree matures. In situations problem if left unmanaged and while it generally does not
where thorns (which can be up to 2 inches (5 cm) long) are kill a tree, it can cause significant decline over time. If not
objectionable, they may be pruned off young trees and will pruned out, the weight of the mistletoe can become great
not re-grow from this location again. enough that the branch may break off. Manual removal
--- Page 5 ---
of mistletoe is the only practical control however, removal Ganoderma root rot (Ganoderma) is caused by a soil-
does not kill the mistletoe as it continues to grow inside the borne fungus and enters mesquite roots primarily through
wood. Since mistletoe is a part of the desert ecology, it is wound sites. Root rot causes slow decline and eventually
an aesthetic decision whether to remove it or not on lightly death of mature trees. There is no recommended treatment
infested trees. Mistletoe berries are a primary food source for infected trees. Fruiting bodies at the base of the tree
of desert birds and only in few situations the mistletoe are most common during the summer rainy season. They
becomes large enough to warrant removal. start as white structures at the base of the tree and develop
into light brown, shelf like fruiting bodies (Fig. 11).
Figure 10: Slime flux on Prosopis sp. Figure 12: Nymph of giant mesquite bug
(Thasus neocalifornicus)
Slime flux is caused by the infection of sapwood by
several bacteria and is a problem with mature mesquites. During the summer months, the giant mesquite bug
The disease causing microorganisms are found in the soil (Thasus gigas) makes its appearance. Although it looks
and probably gain entry through above or below the soil threatening because of its size and dramatic markings, it
line wounds or pruning cuts. After several years, affected is just another insect that is part of the desert ecology. No
areas will exhibit a water-soaked appearance (wet wood). control is recommended for these insects as their damage
Gas is produced by the bacteria (and possibly yeasts) which is minimal. The adults are up to two inches (5 cm) long
force out a foul smelling liquid from cracks and wounds. and have brown and yellow markings on their forewings
The liquid is dark brown to black in color (Fig. 10). Infected and red and black banding on their legs. What makes these
trees live many years and slime flux is more of a nuisance insects interesting is that the immature insects (nymphs)
that requires periodically a strong, hard stream of water are banded an attractive red and white and may appear in
to prevent staining of patios and cars. Seriously infected large numbers in early April (Fig. 12). Although menacing
branches may need removal if they present a safety hazard. looking, they are not considered a damaging pest of
The old remedy of placing drainage tubes into the infected mesquites.
areas is not recommended and may in fact, present more
entry sites for the disease. Another minor pest of mesquite is the mesquite twig
girdler (Oncideres rhodosticta) which may appear in early to
mid-summer. The adult cuts a channel around the stem and
deposits her eggs in now girdled portions. The resulting
damage is “flagging” or browning of the girdled stems.
Since the damage is cosmetic, no control is recommended.
Miscellaneous wood borers may appear from time to time
in older, neglected or stressed trees. These beetles are
typically drawn to trees that are under severe stress and
are considered secondary pests.
Irrigation related issues can cause problems for
mesquite trees or surrounding vegetation. Infrequent
shallow watering for turf will encourage surface rooting
rather than the deep root development that proper
irrigation of trees will provide. Mesquite trees can become
unstable with excess irrigation, such as in lawns, due to
Figure 11: A shelf-shaped mushroom of a wood decay fungus
rapid crown growth and limited root system development.
(Ganoderma sp).
--- Page 6 ---
Another irrigation related problem is improper placement presented with each species to aid in identification (Fig. 14,
of drip emitters. By placing emitters close to the trunk, 15, 17 – 19).
roots primarily develop in these areas. Placing the emitters
Palo verde plays an important role in the desert ecosystem
further out (at the dripline of the tree and beyond) will help
providing habitat for wildlife and serving as a nurse plant
establish a root system which gives stability to the tree and
for small cacti. Flowers produce much nectar for honey.
reduces the occurrence of tree toppling and possible tree
Pods are sought by wildlife and livestock and provided a
loss.
staple for indigenous people in the Southwest. Pods can
Root binding can be a problem of mesquite and palo create heavy litter.
verde trees when purchased in containers. Most mesquite
Parkinsonia aculeata (Mexican palo verde) is found in
but also some of the palo verde species grow very fast
older landscapes, but is no longer considered a desirable
under cultivation. If not transplanted to larger containers
landscape tree. Although a showy blooming tree, it is well
in a timely manner, roots start circling around the outside
armed, short-lived, produces heavy leaf litter, and reseeds
of the root ball and in some cases close around the trunk.
freely on road sides, vacant lots, and in washes.
If not corrected by pruning circling roots at transplanting,
this condition can lead to problems of tree failure. Parkinsonia florida (Blue palo verde)
Palo Verde Species and Cultivars
Figure 13: Profuse bloom on Parkinsonia florida
Palo verdes are popular, drought tolerant landscape trees
in the genus Parkinsonia (formerly Cercidium) and the family
Fabaceae. Palo verdes range from large shrubs to medium
sized trees and are native in the Sonoran Desert except for
P. praecox which is native from Mexico to South America.
Along with saguaro cactus, they are a staple of the Sonoran
Figure 14: Leaf, flower and seed pod of Parkinsonia florida
Desert and are used in many xeriscape plantings. Parkinsonia
florida, blue palo verde, and P. microphylla, the Foothill palo
The blue-green color of stems, branches, and densely
verde, share the title of Arizona’s official state tree.
growing twigs and the prolific bright yellow flowers in
Palo verde trees prefer full sun and well drained soil in spring (Fig. 13) have made it one of the most popular palo
cultivated landscapes. Growth rates vary depending on verde species. Foliage is fine textured and consists of one
supplemental irrigation and species. Conspicuous green, pair of pinnae with 2 – 4 pairs of leaflets (Fig. 14). Blue palo
smooth bark dominates the plant’s appearance during verde flowers in mid-spring, about three weeks earlier than
periods of drought and cold when trees are leafless and gives P. microphylla (Foothill palo verde). Blue palo verde has a
them their common name “palo verde” which in Spanish moderate growth rate. It is adapted to desert soils, but can
means “green stick”. Shoots are armed with small thorns also tolerate lawn conditions. Native to washes and plains
at the nodes or the end and leaves are small, bipinnate. The with deep soil, trees benefit from additional irrigation once
green bark allows photosynthesis and with age turns from or twice during the hot, dry season. This plant is native to
smooth with yellowish green color to rough with gray color. the Sonoran Desert, northern Sinaloa and Baja California,
Besides the striking green bark, a profuse show of yellow Mexico, and can be found at elevations from sea level to
flowers in spring makes palo verdes popular landscape 4,000 feet (1,220 meters). Cold hardiness is reported to 10
trees. Line drawings of leaves, flowers and seed pods are ºF (–12 ºC).
--- Page 7 ---
The profuse amount of flowers and seed pods can create Foothill palo verde trees grow 10 to 20 feet (3 to 6 meters)
heavy litter under the tree canopy. Short thorns on twigs tall with equal spread. They are the slowest growing species
can be a problem near walkways. Blue palo verde generally among the Parkinsonia in cultivation. The canopy is dense
require more pruning than other cultivated palo verdes, with spiny branches and bark color is yellowish green.
because they tend to spread more and have more secondary Leaflets are smallest among the species described here;
branches. Blue palo verde is susceptible to the palo verde leaves have one pair of pinnae with 4 – 8 pairs of leaflets each
borer, mistletoe, and witches’ broom (see under problems). and appear on the tree only for a short time after summer or
winter moisture in natural settings (Fig. 15). Flowers appear
Parkinsonia microphylla (Foothill palo verde, littleleaf palo
briefly and are pale yellow in color. Intensity of flowering
verde)
varies by year and is generally heavier after a wet winter
(Fig. 16).
P. florida and P. microphylla can be differentiated by their
flower colors. P. florida has five deep yellow petals whereas
P. microphylla has four yellow and one whitish petal which
give the plant an overall pale yellow color while in bloom.
Seed pods of P. microphylla are 1.2 – 5 inches (3 – 13 cm),
oblong, and are constricted between seeds (Fig. 15). They
can create heavy litter.
P. microphylla is native to the Sonoran Desert including
Baja California in Mexico. This species requires well drained
soil and does not tolerate lawn or well-watered conditions.
Although extremely drought tolerant, trees might shed
branches during prolonged drought. P. microphylla is
tolerant of temperatures to 15 ºF (–9 ºC). Maintenance in
the landscape generally includes pruning of dead branches,
mistletoe, witches’ broom or to expose lower stems.
Similar to blue palo verde, P. microphylla trees are also
susceptible to the palo verde borer. Foothill palo verde
trees are available in cultivation and large specimens are
successfully moved from the wild to developed areas.
Parkinsonia praecox subsp. glauca (Argentine palo brea)
This tree grows up to 20 feet (6 meters) tall and originated
in Argentina. It has the characteristic green bark, yellow
flowers, and tan pods of the genus. It looks very similar
Figure 15: Leaf, flower and seed pod of Parkinsonia microphylla
to the Sonoran palo brea (P. praecox subsp. praecox) but
has smaller leaflets. The subspecies glauca is considered to
have greater drought tolerance than the Sonoran palo brea,
because it is native in areas that receive as little as 4 inches
(80 – 100 mm) of annual rainfall. Supplemental irrigation
will increase growth. Argentine palo brea is also thought
to have greater cold hardiness to 10 ºF (–12 ºC) based on
observations where the Sonoran palo brea suffered greater
cold damage after frost than the Argentine palo brea. This
open shrub is often trained to a small tree by removing
lower limbs and can be used in areas such as medians and
patios where space may be limited. No problems have
been observed on trees in the landscape.
“Brea” is the Spanish word for tar or pitch and refers to
the waxy coating of the bark that can be scraped off and
used as glue. The exudates from the bark are sweet and
edible and have been used to make soap. Medicinal use of
Figure 16 : Parkinsonia microphylla in full bloom bark has been reported.
--- Page 8 ---
Parkinsonia praecox subsp. praecox (Sonoran palo brea, Brea) that are 2 – 4 inches (5 – 10 cm) in length and have 9 – 19
pairs of leaflets per pinna. Trees reach a height of 21 to 25
feet (7 – 8.3 meters) and grow as wide in canopy. The plant
is hardy to 15 °F (–9 °C). Plants need to be propagated
vegetatively to retain the characteristics of the parent tree.
Figure18: Leaf of Parkinsonia x ‘Desert Museum’
Figure 17: Leaf, flower and seed pod of Parkinsonia praecox
subsp. praecox
This small tree grows 15 to 30 feet (4.5 – 9 meters) tall
with almost equal spread. This subspecies has the largest
leaves of the genus (Fig. 17). Flowers are golden yellow,
the bark is bright green to lime green with foliage of
blue green color. Seed pods are tan colored, oblong and
1.2 – 2.5 inches (3 – 6) cm in length and can create heavy
litter. Growth rate is moderate to rapid and increases with
supplemental irrigation. Plants tolerate a wide range of
soil conditions.
Subspecies praecox is native to the widest range of
the genus and occurs from northwest Mexico in disjunct
populations as far south as Argentina, and from near sea
level to 6,560 feet (2000 meters) elevation. This subspecies is
considered less tolerant to drought and cold temperatures
than the subspecies glauca. Hardiness of plants from
Sonora has been reported at 20 ºF (–7 ºC). Hybrids of P.
praecox with P. microphylla or P. florida have been observed.
Parkinsonia hybrids and cultivars
Parkinsonia x ‘Desert Museum’ is the most popular
hybrid of the genus and is a natural three- way cross of (P.
aculeata x P. microphylla) x P. florida. Desirable horticultural
characteristics of this tree include its upright growth habit,
no thorns, fast growth with irrigation, smooth light green
bark, and large masses of yellow flowers produced from
March to May. Leaf size is intermediate between the parent
taxa. P. x ‘Desert Museum’ has one or two pairs of pinnae Figure 19: Leaf, flower and seed pod of Parkinsonia x sonorae
--- Page 9 ---
Another palo verde hybrid, Parkinsonia x sonorae (Sonoran True mistletoe can affect all Parkinsonia species.
palo verde) is a cross of P. microphylla x P. praecox. This small Description and control methods are the same as described
tree grows 10 to 20 feet (3.3 to 6.3 meters) high and as wide, under the mesquite problem section.
but is not widely available in the trade.
Palo verde root borer (Derobrachus geminatus) is the larval
A few other cultivars available in the trade have been grub stage of the 3 – 3.5 inch (8 – 9 cm) palo verde beetle.
selected by nurseries for desirable aesthetic appearance or The adult beetle is dark brown to black and has prominent
improved cold hardiness. antennae approximately half the overall length of the insect.
The larval stage is up to 5 inches (12.7 cm) in length and
Culture attacks the roots of many desert trees including palo verdes.
Adult insects emerge from 1 inch (2.5 cm) wide holes in the
Palo verde trees are extremely drought tolerant once
soil during summer rains. Upon the removal of dead palo
established, but vary in their tolerance to irrigation. P.
verde trees, the grub is usually present in the roots, hence
florida is most tolerant of the genus of frequently irrigated
the name. No control measures are recommended.
conditions such as lawns, while P. microphylla does not
tolerate frequent irrigation. Even when tolerant of turf Palo verde webbers (Bryotropha inaequalis) emerge in
conditions, desert trees including palo verde are not spring and become apparent because of the silken tubes in
recommended in turf. The shallow frequent irrigations to which they live. The fine webbing appears soon after leaves
maintain turf can lead to possible tree toppling and loss. In emerge after winter rains on P. microphylla. Small caterpillars
addition, sun-loving grass species such as bermuda grass are up to ½ inch long and slender. Palo verde webbers
do not grow well in the shade below the tree. appear only seasonally and are not a pest warranting control
measures.
P. microphylla is extremely susceptible to deep planting or
having the base of the trunk covered with soil. Prolonged References
exposure to soil at the trunk base predisposes the tree to rot
and tree failure. Johnson, M. 1996. Palo verde – a review of the genus
Cercidium. Aridus 8(3):1 – 6.
Problems Jones, W. and C. Sacamano. 2000. Landscape Plants for Dry
Regions. Fisher Books, Tucson, AZ.
Burkart, A. 1976. A Monograph of the Genus Prosopis
(Leguminosae subfam. Mimosoideae). Journal of the Arnold
Arboretum 57(3, 4): 219-249, 450-525.
Acknowledgements
Line drawings are courtesy of Matt Johnson (except for
one drawing done by Lucretia Hamilton), photo in fig. 12
(giant mesquite bug nymph) courtesy of Carl Olson, photos
in fig. 9 and fig.11 are courtesy of Dr. Mary Olsen.
Figure 20: Witches’ broom on palo verde
Witches’ broom causes a proliferation of dense twig
growth, but the cause of the problem is unclear at this
time (Fig. 20). Removal of affected branches is the only
management method to date, but the broom regrows soon
after removal. P. florida (blue palo verde) is the primary
species affected by this disorder.
--- Page 10 ---
ARIZONA COOPERATIVE
E TENSION
TUCson, ArizonA 85721
UrsUlA K. sChUCh
Specialist and Professor, Plant Science
JACK J. Kelly
ConTACT:
UrsUlA K. sChUCh
ukschuch@cals.arizona.edu
This information has been reviewed by university faculty.
cals.arizona.edu/pubs/garden/az1429.pdf
Originally published: 2003
cals.arizona.edu/pubs
sex, national origin, age, disability, veteran status, or sexual orientation in its programs and activities.