--- Page 1 ---
ARIZONA COOPERATIVE
E TENSION
AZ1455 07/08
Pruning Citrus
“Instinct must be thwarted just as one prunes the
branches of a tree so that it will grow better.”
Henri Matisse
Introduction
At a Glance
Pruning is a common task necessary for best production
of many common fruit trees. Most types of deciduous • Prune citrus to eliminate sprouts, remove weak, crossing or dead
trees are pruned to invigorate the tree, to improve branch branches, or to allow more light in the canopy.
configuration, and thus make branches less likely to split • February through April are the best months to prune.
under a heavy crop, to improve fruit quality, and/or to
• Remove all sprouts originating from the trunk. Most sprouts are
reduce the crop load which will improve the potential size
best removed by hand when they are small.
of individual fruits.
• Remove branches at the collar using a three-part cut.
Homeowners with previous experience pruning
deciduous trees often assume that citrus trees should be • Citrus trees need not be skirted except for aesthetical reasons.
pruned similarly. However citrus wood is naturally strong • Citrus trees may be easily hedged.
and is not as likely to break under the stress of a large fruit
• Protect exposed wood from the sun using latex paint or
load. Furthermore, citrus trees can produce fruit in all but
whitewash.
the most shaded part of the tree, and need not be regularly
pruned to allow more light into the interior of the canopy.
Even when the crop load is heavy, individual fruit size is
large, so pruning to reduce the crop load and improve fruit
When to Prune
size is not necessary except occasionally with tangerines.
Finally, citrus fruit quality is typically just as good or better Regular pruning for desert-grown citrus trees should take
from a minimally pruned tree as compared with one that place in the spring, between February and April. Citrus-
is heavily pruned. growing areas of the state which are cooler should delay
Nevertheless, citrus trees should not be left completely the beginning of pruning until late-February or March.
unpruned. Proper citrus care for the young tree should Most pruning that requires tools should occur at this time.
include sprout removal, and cautious elimination of weak Pruning may be done prior to bloom, and it is important to
limbs within the tree canopy. For mature trees, sprouts note that although flowers may not be seen, they exist in a
should be removed regularly, deadwood should be pruned microscopic stage and will be lost due to pruning. However,
out, and diseased or crisscrossing limbs should be removed. unless pruning is drastic, yield loss will be minimal.
If there is no interior fruit, the center of the canopy may If pruning exposes large limbs or the trunk to the sunlight,
need to be opened up to improve light penetration. completing the job in the late winter and spring allows the
Also, the bottom of the canopy may need to be removed tree sufficient time to grow new foliage that will shade the
(“skirting”). newly-exposed wood within the canopy before it is subject
--- Page 2 ---
growth (or the lack of such growth) will show the damage
after several months. Once any damage is evident, typically
by early summer (Figure 2), it is time to remove dead
branches by cutting back several inches into healthy, green
wood, then protecting the large limbs that are cut with
diluted latex paint (See Protecting the Tree on page 4).
What to Prune
Sprouts
Sprouts (also known as “water sprouts”, “shoots”, or
“suckers”) arise from above or below the bud union and
the trunk, or from large limbs, are green, and lack bark
(herbaceous). In almost all cases, they should be removed.
The bud union is the place where the bud of the citrus
Figure 1. Hendersonula damage to citrus limbs. variety was originally grafted to the rootstock, and can be
identified by the level on the trunk where there is a change
to the harsh summer sun. It is not generally recommend in bark texture or trunk circumference. Below that level is
to prune citrus from May through the middle of October the rootstock, and above it is the variety.
since exposed limbs and trunks can be damaged by intense
When sprouts originate from the trunk below the bud
sunlight, possibly leading to sunscald or an infestation of
union, they are part of the rootstock, and can sometimes be
Hendersonula bark rot (sooty mold); a disease for which
identified by their leaf shape which is often, but not always,
there is no cure other than limb removal (Figure 1). We
different than that of the variety (Figure 3). Sprouts with
recommend summer removal of large limbs and large
trifoliate leaves are always part of the rootstock. Rootstock
sprouts only in cases where damage is present, and where
sprouts, when allowed to grow, have excessive thorns,
further delay would lead to additional injury. Whenever
grow fruit that are often unpalatable, tend to flourish at the
and wherever trunk or limbs are exposed to the sun, they
expense of the variety, and make harvest of the desirable
should be protected with white paint (See Protecting the
Tree on page 4).
Sprouts and small branches, removed by hand or with
hand pruners, may be taken off at any time. We do not
recommend extensive pruning from November though
January, since pruning often stimulates tender re-growth
which is susceptible to freeze damage.
If trees have been damaged by a freeze, it is best not to
prune them immediately. Loose, split bark and oozing
are immediate signs of injury, but damage may be more
extensive. Freeze-damaged trees will sometimes put out
a growth flush which will die off in the late spring. New
norehtaM
leahciM
.rD
ysetruoc
otohP
Figure 2. Freeze-damaged lemon branches. Note the delineation between Figure 3. Rootstock suckers. Note trifoliate leaves.
live and dead wood at the arrow.
--- Page 3 ---
fruit difficult. Ultimately, they often out-compete the variety canopy once it has been removed. Lower canopy fruit
for the desired part of the canopy. For these reasons, they often is of the best quality because it is not often affected
should be removed. Sometimes, shoots will arise from the by sunburn, scarring by windblown soil particles and by
soil surrounding the trunk, and should be removed. the movement of adjacent branches and twigs, or by bird
predation. We recommend removal of the low-hanging
When sprouts arise from the trunk above the bud union,
branches only to improve access to the soil surface, the
they are the variety. Nevertheless, they are often thorny
irrigation system, or to the interior of the tree.
and unproductive, make picking interior fruit difficult,
and should be removed unless they are intended to fill
Hedging
a part of the canopy. Likewise, sprouts that arise almost
perpendicularly from large limbs are usually unproductive Citrus trees can be hedged if necessary. Citrus trees may
and should be pruned off. Lemon sprouts are quite vigorous be planted close together, and will form an impenetrable
and thorny, and often extend above the canopy. If left hedge if allowed to do so. In time, fruit production will
unpruned, they will produce fruit only in the topmost decrease in the interior of the trees because of excessive
portion of the sprout. The weight of this fruit will often shading. Manual or electric hedgers may be used, and the
cause the sprout to break when conditions are windy. blade should always be sharp.
Branches How to Prune
Small and large branches should be removed if they are Sprouts
dead or damaged, are crisscrossed, are rubbing against or
Sprouts are best removed by hand when they are small.
damaging the fruit, or are impeding access to the trunk,
They will break off easily and removal will not damage the
the soil, or the irrigation system. Twigs that die because of
tree. When they are larger, hand pruners should be used to
excessive shading in the center of the canopy need not be
make a smooth cut and avoid damaging the tree. Sprouts
removed, because they will fall naturally. For small trees,
should never be allowed to get so large so that a lopper or
weak branches can be removed in order to favor larger
saw is necessary. For small trees, sprouts will grow from the
branches that will form the scaffold lambs of the tree.
trunk and should be removed regularly, perhaps as often as
Larger branches can be removed to allow light penetration once a month. A good “rule of thumb” is to keep the lower
in areas of excessively dark interior canopy, where no fruit 10 to 12 inches of trunk free of sprouts. White cardboard
is produced. This is most commonly done on tangerines can also be wrapped around the trunk to inhibit sprouting.
to improve fruit set and color, but should always be done As trees get larger, sprout production will decrease, and
cautiously to avoid sunburn damage to the remaining removal need not occur as often. If a hand pruner must
branches. be used, remove the sprout at its base, leaving no stub, but
Pruning low-hanging branches is known as skirting retaining the branch collar. The collar is the swollen area
(Figure 4). Skirting is often done to make the tree more of trunk tissue that forms around the base of a branch and
aesthetically pleasing by removing branches and thus that will protect the tree from decay. The tree will heal the
exposing the trunk. However, there is nothing wrong with wound beginning with tissue that grows from the collar. Do
allowing the tree canopy to naturally extend toward the not leave a jagged cut, and be sure the tool is sharp. There is
ground, and it is very difficult to re-establish a low-hanging no need to use pruning paint or other compounds to cover
the wound, the tree will heal naturally.
Branches
Branches cannot be removed with the fingers, but must be
removed with a tool. For smaller branches, hand pruners
or loppers can be used. For larger branches, a curved tree
saw with a sharp blade is the best tool.
Regardless of branch size, if no re-growth is wanted,
prune the branch flush with the collar, not flush with the
trunk. Pruning flush with the collar will give the tree the
best chance to heal, and will minimize sprout re-growth at
the point of the cut.
When cutting branches over 1½ inch in diameter, use a
3-part cut. (Figure 5) For the first cut, choose a location 6
to 12 inches out from the collar. Saw through about 1/3 of
the branch starting from the underside. This is called the
undercut, and will keep the bark from tearing. Then, remove
the weight of the branch by making a second cut about 3
Figure 4. Skirted trees.
--- Page 4 ---
Hedging
Hedging is best done with a mechanical or power hedging
tool. Be sure the tool is sharp. Branches with more than
½ inch diameter should be cut with a pruning saw or
lopper.
Protecting the tree
If the trunk or branches are newly exposed to the sun as
a result of pruning, they should be protected. Likewise, if
the trunk of a tree is not shaded by the canopy, protective
Figure 5. Three cuts are necessary to remove large limbs. This procedure
measures should be taken. Liberally paint the exposed
prevents bark from stripping down the trunk.
wood with white latex or other standard tree paint. Latex
inches further out from the undercut, cutting completely paint can be diluted by 50% with water, or one can use
through the branch, from top to bottom, until the branch whitewash. Do not use an oil-based paint.
falls away. Finally, cut the resulting stub back to the branch
collar. Make sure the cut is smooth. The tree will heal the
Any products, services, or organizations that are
wound itself, beginning with tissue that develops from the
mentioned, shown, or indirectly implied in this publication
collar. No pruning paint or sealant is necessary.
Diseased branches should be cut back or removed
completely. If the affected branch is to be cut back, be sure
that the cut is made into healthy wood. Healthy wood is
whitish-yellow, the color of a manila folder. Any darker
wood visible at the cut is an indication that disease still
exists (Figure 6).
ARIZONA COOPERATIVE
E TENSION
TUCson, ArizonA 85721
glenn C. WrighT
Associate Specialist
JACk kelly
Associate Agent
ConTACT:
glenn C. WrighT
gwright@ag.arizona.edu
This information has been reviewed by university faculty.
cals.arizona.edu/pubs/crops/az1455.pdf
Figure 6. Diseased citrus wood with dark staining.
religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, veteran status, or sexual orientation in its programs and activities.