--- Page 1 ---
AND LIFE SCIENCES
AZ1624 March 2014
W Q , E. y H
ater uality coli and our ealtH
Channah Rock and Berenise Rivera
Figure 1. E. coli - Gram-negative, facultatively anaerobic, rod prokaryote; with multiple flagella and fimbriae.
E. coli can cause urinary tract infections, traveler’s diarrhea and nosocomial infections. (Dennis Kunkel
Microscopy, Inc./Visuals Unlimited, Inc.)
What is Water Quality?
Water quality refers to the chemical, physical or biological media (like JELL-O) under special conditions (Ingerson and
characteristics of water. Water quality is a measure of the Reid, 2011). Most E. coli do not cause illness but if a person
condition of water relative to its’ impact on one or more becomes sick from E. coli, the primary site of infection is the
aquatic species like fish and frogs or on human uses such gastrointestinal tract and symptoms can include nausea,
as drinking and swimming. The most common standards vomiting, diarrhea, and fever. This bacterium lives and
used to assess water quality relate to health of ecosystems, grows naturally in the gastrointestinal tract of humans and
safety of human contact and drinking water. Water quality animals but if it gets in the wrong place in the body, for
protection programs in Arizona are based on federal and example, the kidneys or blood, it can cause illness. According
state law and are administered by the U.S. Environmental to Ingerson and Reid (2011), the infection may spread
Protection Agency (EPA) or Arizona Department of within the body (to blood, liver, and nervous system). These
Environmental Quality (ADEQ) to keep ecosystems and microorganisms are shed in fecal material, or feces, hence
people safe. their spread is termed the “fecal-oral” route of transmission.
Contaminated food and water are the most common ways
What is E. coli? to be exposed to E. coli. There are specific types (also called
“strains”) of E. coli that can cause disease and there are
Escherichia coli (E. coli) are gram-negative bacteria and
also harmless types. Some of the harmful types of E. coli
are a type of fecal coliform bacteria commonly found in
are classified into the following groups: Enterotoxigenic
the intestines of animals and humans (Figure 1). E. coli
(ETEC), Enteropathogenic (EPEC), Enterohemorragic
are so small they can’t be seen without a microscope;
(EHEC) and Enteroinvasive (EIEC). ETEC, EPEC and
however, their growth can be seen as colonies on agar
--- Page 2 ---
Table 1. Harmful strains of E. coli
Strains of E. coli Modes of Transmission Disease
ETEC causes diarrhea without fever. It is common in infants and is
Enterotoxigenic (ETEC) Food or water ingestion
often the cause of travelers’ diarrhea
Enteropathogenic Food or water ingestion, direct and EPEC causes watery, sometimes bloody diarrhea. It is a common
(EPEC) indirect human contact cause of infantile diarrhea in underdeveloped countries.
EHEC strains cause bloody diarrhea and can sometimes damage
Enterohemorragic
Food/ingestion, direct or indirect the kidneys and progress to the potentially fatal hemolytic uremic
(EHEC)
human contact syndrome (HUS). EHEC has caused many large food-borne outbreaks
worldwide; O157:H7 is the best known strain.
Enteroinvasive EIEC causes watery, dysentery like diarrhea. Fever is another com-
Food and water ingestion
(EIEC) mon symptom.
EIEC are all generally transmitted through contaminated have pointed out that the rates of some serious health effects,
food and water (Gerba et al., 2009 and Vieira et al., 2007). such as those mentioned above, are higher in swimmers
Table 1 summarizes the harmful types of E. coli, mode of when compared to non-swimmers (Soller et al., 2010).
transmission, and disease outcome. A more well-known
The presence of E. coli may be indicative of contamination
type or strain of E. coli is O157:H7 which is found under the
with other bacteria, viruses or protozoa that can make you
EHEC group and is commonly the cause of contaminated
sick. Salmonella is a bacterium commonly implicated in
foods such as spinach and meat but has also been implicated
contaminated food and water. Salmonella can cause diseases
in outbreaks where water was the source of contamination.
such as typhoid fever from consumption of contaminated
water and Salmonellosis from eating contaminated beef
E. coli in Our Water
and poultry. A person consuming contaminated food or
The presence of E. coli in water is a strong indication water can experience nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps,
of recent sewage or animal waste contamination. It is diarrhea, and fever. Another common water-borne (spends
important to note that E. coli and waste can get in our all or part of its life in water) pathogen, Cryptosporidium,
water in many different ways. For example, during is a protozoan parasite affecting the gastrointestinal tract
rainfall and snow melt, E. coli may be washed into creeks, of humans and animals and it is shed in the feces in the
rivers, streams, lakes, or groundwater (Griffith et al., form of an oocyst. This oocyst consists of a hard outer
2003, Roslev and Bukh, 2011) from the land surface. Other shell that protects it from degradation in the environment.
ways consist of natural wildlife, failing septic systems, Cryptosporidium is highly resistant to chlorine commonly
recreational activities and local land use practices (for used in drinking water treatment, and has been implicated
example, manure used as fertilizers, livestock, concentrated in several waterborne disease outbreaks in the past. One
feeding operations). Human and animal sources of fecal such outbreak took place in Milwaukee on April 1993,
pollution represent a serious health risks because of the which infected over 400,000 people and killed more than
high likelihood of the existence of pathogens also in the 100 (Gerba, 2009). Heavy rains flooded agricultural plains in
fecal waste. A pathogen is a microorganism that can cause Wisconsin and produced substantial runoff into a river that
disease and make someone sick. Cattle, swine, and chickens provided the City of Milwaukee with drinking water. The
also carry pathogens that can be transmitted from animals drinking water treatment facility was not able to adequately
to humans causing disease. Therefore introduction of treat or “kill” the high levels of Cryptosporidium in the water
any animal or human waste in water is of high concern. due to their highly resistant outer shell. The Milwaukee
outbreak is an example of the dangers protozoa can pose
Numerous studies have been conducted around the
in drinking water. To date, the Milwaukee outbreak is the
world to assess the connection between water quality and
largest outbreak to be documented in the United States.
serious health effects to people who come into contact
As demonstrated by the number of people infected in the
with that water through recreation (swimming, wading,
Milwaukee outbreak, consequences of consuming fecally
fishing, etc.). Although not all E. coli bacteria are typically
contaminated water may be severe in people with weakened
pathogenic, extensive studies have demonstrated that E.
immune systems (e.g., infants and the elderly) and sometimes
coli concentrations are the best predictor of swimming-
fatal in people with severely compromised immune systems.
associated gastrointestinal illness (diarrhea). In addition to
gastrointestinal illness (GI), illnesses such as eye infections, Because contaminated water poses such a large threat
skin irritations, ear, nose, throat infections, and respiratory to human health, water managers and regulatory agencies
illness are also common in people who have come into have designed tests to tell us our water is safe. We commonly
contact with water contaminated with feces. Some studies use E. coli to indicate that fecal contamination is present in
--- Page 3 ---
water. Although, we do not want to find E. coli in our water, E. coli is currently the most reliable indicator of fecal
these bacteria can be easily tested and quantified by simple bacterial contamination of surface waters in the U.S.
methods. Detection of these bacteria in water means that according to water quality standards set by the EPA.
fecal contamination has occurred and suggests that enteric EPA bacterial water quality standards are based on a
pathogens, like the ones mentioned above, may be present. level of E. coli in water above which the health risk from
This also means that humans and animals should not come waterborne illness is unacceptably high. Due to the many
into contact with the contaminated water until the presence of associated health risks the presence of pathogens and other
E. coli is no longer detected, and the water is considered safe. microorganisms can pose, regulators such as the US EPA
and ADEQ have implemented ways to reduce contact with
impaired waters by defining various water use categories.
How do we make sure our water is safe?
Two of these categories are partial-body contact (PBC) and
Numerous government and state agencies as well as local
full-body contact (FBC). According to the US EPA, partial-
watershed groups test water quality to ensure it is safe or
body contact refers to the human body coming in contact
if there are potential problems with contamination. Water
with surface water used for recreational activities, but not
quality testing and data reporting in the past were based on
to the point of full-body submergence (2009). Levels of E.
bacterial groups called total and fecal coliforms. Coliforms
coli cannot exceed 575 colony forming units (CFU) per 100
can be found in the aquatic environment, in soil, and on
mL of water for partial body contact (US EPA, 2009). The
vegetation; they are universally present in large numbers
term CFU refers to the number of living bacterial cells in
in the feces of warm-blooded animals. While coliforms
a water sample. Therefore, this measure is used to tell us
themselves are not normally causes of serious illness, they
the degree of contamination in samples of water or the
are easy to culture and their presence is used to indicate that
degree of the infection in humans and animals. For full-
other pathogenic organisms of fecal origin may be present.
body contact, E. coli levels cannot exceed 235 CFU per
Today, water quality testing has evolved and is now based
100 mL of water. Full-body contact refers to the human
on the concentration of E. coli. E. coli is one of the types of
body being completely underwater in activities such as
bacteria within the fecal coliform group and is a predictor
swimming or other recreational activity (US EPA, 2009).
of fecal contamination. Water that is consumed for drinking
water purposes is tested for the concentration, or level, of E.
coli that is deemed safe for human consumption. Similarly, What can you do in your community to
wastewater that has been treated and then recycled for protect water quality?
irrigation purposes and/or discharged to surface waters
Essential to human beings and ecosystems, water is
must also meet certain levels of E. coli to be considered
closely linked with human life. Numerous activities that
safe. Rivers that are used for recreation, such as fishing and
occur within your community can ultimately impact surface
swimming, are required to meet certain levels of E. coli or
water quality. Here are some ways you can help keep rivers,
they can be deemed “impaired” (Rivera and Rock, 2011).
lakes and streams safe for both people and ecosystems.
Table 2 outlines the various acceptable levels/concentrations
of E. coli of the different water uses mentioned above. The ▪ Learn about your local water body or watershed
concentrations of E. coli used in regulation are based on ▪ Identify ways you can help prevent polluted runoff from
assessment of the volume of water a person consumes your home, ranch, or farm
during different practices and the likelihood the person
▪ Pick up pet waste in and around your neighborhood
would become sick after coming into contact with the
▪ Keep domestic animals and/or livestock out of
contaminated water. In circumstances where the contact or
waterways (or reduce their exposure)
ingestion of the water is high (swimming) the concentration
▪ Properly maintain your septic system and have it
of the E. coli that is deemed acceptable is lower. In situations
inspected when appropriate
where the contact with the water is low (irrigation) the
levels of E. coli considered acceptable may be higher ▪ Join a local watershed group or volunteer organization
because there is a lower risk of a person becoming sick. active in environmental issues in your community
Table 2. Level of E. coli permitted for Different Types of Water (ADEQ, 2010 and EPA, 2009)
Purpose Level of E. coli
Drinking Water Zero
Surface Water Full-Body Contact
235 cfu/100 mL
(swimming)
Surface Water Partial-Body Contact
575 cfu/100 mL
(Fishing, boating, etc…)
Wastewater < 2.2cfu/100 mL
(irrigation or discharge) < 1.0 cfu/100 mL
--- Page 4 ---
▪ Volunteer during clean up events targeting pollution Soller, J.A, Schoen, M. E., Bartrand, T., Ravenscroft, J.E., and
near surface waters Ashbolt, N. J. 2010 Estimated human health risks from
exposure to recreational waters impacted by human and
▪ Do not throw trash into rivers, lakes, and streams (while
non- human sources of faecal contamination. Water
the trash may not contain fecal matter or waste, it may
Research 30: 1-18.
attract wild or domestic animals which may introduce
fecal contamination near water bodies and causing Vieira, N., Bates, S. J., Solberg, O. W., Ponce, K., Howsmon,
pollution) R., Cevallos, W., Trueba, G., Riley, L. and Eisenberg, J. N.
S. 2007 High Prevalence of Enteroinvasive Escherichia
▪ When camping or hiking, properly dispose of waste and
Coli Isolated in a Remote Region of Northern Coastal
trash to reduce the attraction to animals
Ecuador. Am J Trop Med Hyg 76(3): 528-533.
Water is a very precious resource; by doing your part U. S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2008 Arizona 2008
to protect our water sources we can ensure benefits Water Quality Assessment Report. [Online] http://
to future generations and to the safety of its users. iaspub.epa.gov/waters10/attains_index.control?p_
area=AZ#wqs.
References: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2009 Water Quality
Standards [Online] http://www.epa.gov/waterscience/
Arizona Department of Environmental Quality. 2010 Water
standards/wqslibrary/az/az9wqs.pdf
Quality. [Online] http://www.azdeq.gov/environ/
water/index.html. U. S. Senate. 2002 Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
[Online] http://www.epw.senate.gov/water.pdf.
Francy, D. S., Myers, D. N., and Metzker K. D. 1993 Escherichia
coli and fecal coliform bacteria as indicators of recreational
water quality. U.S. Geological Survey. Water Resources
Investigations Report 93-4083. Columbus, Ohio.
Gerba, C. “Indicator Microorganisms.” Environmental
Microbiology. 2nd Ed. Academic Press, San Diego, CA,
2009. 485-499.
Gerba, C. “Environmentally Transmitted Pathogens.”
Environmental Microbiology. 2nd Ed. Academic Press, AND LIFE SCIENCES
Griffith, J. F., Weisberg, S. B., and McGee C. D. 2003 Evaluation
TUCson, ArizonA 85721
Hathaway, J. M. and Hunt, W. F. 2008 URBAN Waterways:
Removal of Pathogens in Stormwater. North Carolina ChAnnAh roCk
Ingerson, M. M. and Reid, A. 2011 E. coli: Good, Bad, & Deadly. Berenise riverA
PhD candidate, SWES Department
American Academy of Microbiology. pg. 1-14.
Rivera, B. and Rock, C. 2011 Microbial Source Tracking: ConTACT:
Watershed Characterization and Source Identification.
ChAnnAh roCk
channah@ag.arizona.edu
Roslev, P., and Bukh, A. S. 2011 State of the Art Molecular This information has been reviewed by University faculty.
cals.arizona.edu/pubs/water/az1624.pdf
Markers for Fecal Pollution Source Tracking in Water.
cals.arizona.edu/pubs
Any products, services or organizations that are mentioned, shown or indirectly implied in this publication
sex, national origin, age, disability, veteran status, or sexual orientation in its programs and activities.