--- Page 1 ---
AZ1713 September 2016
Container Gardening In The Southwest Desert
Kelly Murray Young
These agaves in boldly colored containers add visual interest to the landscape.
You do not need access to land to grow a garden. If certain
Challenges of Container Gardening
conditions are met, you can grow plants in containers in very
Smaller containers dry out faster and are more prone to
small spaces.
temperature fluctuations. Container gardens require more
frequent watering and fertilizing than gardens grown in the
Advantages of Container Gardening
ground.
▪ Any space with access to sufficient light can host a
container garden, no matter how small.
What Plants Can Be Grown in a
▪ Weeds and other pests are more easily managed in
Container?
containers.
As long as a plant’s water, light, space, and nutritional
▪ Using containers makes gardening accessible to all
needs are met, planting medium and location, any plant can
people, including those with limited mobility and be grown in a container. To grow root vegetables like carrots,
flexibility the container must be deep enough to accommodate the roots.
Tall plants will also require a deep and wide container so
▪ Different plants in separate containers can be grouped
that the roots can adequately anchor the plant. Additionally,
together for novel color and texture combinations.
a stake or trellis may be needed to provide support for tall
▪ Plants with different irrigation requirements can be plants, such as tomatoes.
managed separately but within the same small space.
--- Page 2 ---
Be creative when selecting a container. Consider giving a
Characteristics of a Good Container
second life to objects that might otherwise be discarded and
You may be surprised at the things that can be used as
end up in a landfill. Some unusual container ideas include
a container. Your selection should be based first on what
supports good plant growth and development. What is ▪ Planting directly into the potting soil bag. Lay the bag
pleasing to the eye is second! Even something unattractive on its side, cut a hole in the top for the plant and poke
but utilitarian can be decorated to look good. some drainage holes in the bottom for an instant garden.
An appropriate container for gardening should meet these ▪ Leggings, tights, and nylon stockings can be filled with
four requirements: planting medium and hung up to take advantage of
available vertical gardening space.
1. Large enough to support a mature root system.
Larger containers give plants more rooting space, are ▪ Old toilets, tubs and sinks already have drainage holes
less vulnerable to temperature fluctuations and will and will last a lifetime. Restaurants and other food
not require as frequent irrigation as smaller containers. service establishments sometimes give away large,
The larger the container and the more soil and water it plastic buckets.
holds, the heavier it will be and more difficult to move.
Put larger containers on wheels or casters to permit
moving plants around. This is great for frost sensitive
small trees like limes that will need to be moved into a
shelter when it becomes too cold.
2. Provides adequate drainage.
Plant roots require oxygen. If the container does not
allow excess water to drain away from root, they will
suffocate and die. Also, certain plant fungal diseases
thrive in standing water. A good container allows excess
water to drain freely out of the pot, but keeps the soil
in. Drainage holes can become clogged by soil or roots
over time, so be sure to periodically check for adequate
drainage. Several, small drainage holes are preferred to
one large one.
3. Retains the planting medium.
The planting medium should not get washed out of the
container during irrigation.
Food-safe plastic buckets make durable planters.
4. Not made of toxic materials and was not used to store
toxic materials.
Be sure that there are no residual substances that may be
leached from the container into the soil that are harmful
to the plant or, if the container is used to grow food
plants, substances that are toxic to humans.
An old drawer supports several cabbage plants.
The material that the roots grow in is called the planting
medium. You can purchase a pre-mixed planting medium
from a garden center or nursery, or make your own. Some
mixtures contain soil, others are soilless. The planting medium
you select is determined by the type of plants you are growing.
Here are some characteristics of a good planting medium for
You can purchase a complete container garden system such as Earth Box®. container gardens.
--- Page 3 ---
Characteristics of a Good Planting Medium OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
1. Free of weed seeds, diseases and other pests
Salt Accumulation and Leaching
Since plants are growing in a very limited root
Tap water quality varies significantly from location to
environment, it is important to eliminate weed
location. In our desert environment, most tap water has a
competition. Garden soil taken directly from the ground
fairly high salt content. Every time we water plants with tap
is likely to contain many weed seeds that will germinate
water, we add salt to the planting medium. Fertilizers are
and steal water and nutrients from your plants. Garden also salts, and as we fertilize our container plants, the salt
soil can be pasteurized before using in containers (see content of the medium increases. Excess salt is toxic to plants,
side bar). just as it is to humans. The most obvious symptom of “salt
burn” is a browning and death of the tip and/or edges of the
2. Drains well
leaves that is bordered by a yellow “halo”. To remove (leach)
Roots require oxygen and unless they are aquatic plants
accumulated salts from the containers, periodic applications of
they have difficulty extracting oxygen from water.
large amounts of water are necessary. Be sure that the excess
Native desert soil often has a high clay content, which
water during these leaching events drains quickly and easily
tends to drain very slowly and should be avoided in
away. Softened water should not be used to water plants
containers. Do not place gravel or stones in the bottom because of the high salt content.
of the container, as this will limit the space available for
colonization by roots.
Fertilizer
3. Has good water holding capacity
Plants grown in the ground have access to a much larger
Finding the balance between proper drainage and water
volume of soil and the nutrients the soil contains. Nutrients
holding capacity in your container garden is a challenge.
in container planting medium are continually drawn from the
Because of their limited size, containers tend to dry out medium by plants and need to replenished. Many successful
very quickly. Sand improves drainage; organic matter container gardeners apply a weak solution of a complete
such as peat moss and compost increase water holding fertilizer with micronutrients frequently. Most commercial
capacity. potting mixes contain fertilizer.
4. Lightweight and loose enough for root penetration
Planting media that contain soil with a high clay content Light Requirements
can become very hard, limiting root growth. Different plants have different light requirements. Indoor
light quality and quantity tends to be inadequate for plant
Here are some planting media recipes you can make at
growth. Most common houseplants are tropical, understory
home: (All ingredients are mixed in equal parts)
species that are adapted to very low light conditions and
Recipe 1: do well indoors. If placed outdoors in direct sunlight, they
Peat moss quickly sunburn, dry out, and die.
Clean garden soil* Fruiting plants, such as tomatoes, melons, and citrus have
Coarse builder’s sand much higher light requirements and require several hours of
bright light each day to survive, grow, bloom and produce
Recipe 2:
fruit. A sunny, south-facing windowsill will likely provide
Finished compost
enough light to grow many vegetable crops. Leafy greens
Coarse builder’s sand
can grow well under partly sunny conditions.
Peat moss
Understanding the needs of each plant and placing it in the
Recipe 3:
right location where it gets the proper amount of light is crucial
Finished compost
to the success of your container garden. Bear in mind that if
Coarse builder’s sand
the container is outdoors in full sun, the planting medium and
Clean garden soil
roots can get very hot. Try to keep the container in the shade,
while allowing leaves access to light.
*Garden soil can be pasteurized by heating in the oven. Place
moist soil in an oven heated to 250oF. Use a meat thermometer to
monitor the internal temperature of the soil. Once it has reached
180oF continuously for 30 minutes, most weed seeds, insects
and disease organisms will be killed. Be advised that this process
may produce an unfavorable odor in your home.
--- Page 4 ---
GROWING VEGETABLES IN CONTAINERS
(FROM THE ARIZONA MASTER GARDENER MANUAL)
Inches
Days from
Light Minimum between
Vegetable* seed to Comments
Requirements** container size plants in
harvest
containers
Several plantings, 2-week
Beans, Bush FS 2 gal. 2 - 3 45 - 60
intervals
Beets FS/PS 1/2 gal. 2 - 3 50 - 60 Thin plants when 6 - 8” tall
Several plantings, 2-week
Carrots FS/PS 1 qt. 2 - 3 65 - 80
intervals
Cabbage FS/PS 5 gal. 12 - 18 65 - 120 Requires fertile soil
Chard, Swiss FS/PS 1/2 gal. 4 - 6 30 - 40 Harvest leaves
Requires hot weather, Support
Cucumbers FS 5 gal. 14 - 18 70 - 80
vining types
Eggplant FS 5 gal. 1 / container 75 - 100 Requires fertile soil
Kale FS/PS 5 gal. 10 - 15 55 - 65 Harvest leaves
Several plantings, 2-week
Lettuce, Leaf PS 1/2 gal. 4 - 5 35 - 40
intervals
Several plantings, 2-week
Mustard Greens PS 1/2 gal. 4 - 5 35 - 40
intervals
Onions, Green FS/PS 1/2 gal. 2 - 3 70 - 100 Needs lots of moisture
Peppers, Bell FS 2 gal. 1 / container 110 - 120 Requires hot weather
Squash, Summer FS 5 gal. 1 / container 50 - 60 Plant only bush type
Tomatoes FS 5 gal. 1 / container 55 - 100 Stake & prune or cage
Tomatoes, Cherry FS 1 gal. 1 / container 55 - 100 Helps to stake & prune
Turnips FS/PS 3 gal. 2 - 3 30 - 60 Harvest leaves & roots
* Consult seed catalogs for varieties adapted to container culture.
** FS = Full Sun, FS/PS = Full Sun, tolerates Partial Shade, PS = Partial Shade
--- Page 5 ---
TUCson, ArizonA 85721
Kelly yoUng
Assistant Agent - ANR / Horticulture
ConTACT:
Kelly yoUng
kyoung@cals.arizona.edu
This information has been reviewed by University faculty.
extension.arizona.edu/pubs/az1713-2016.pdf
extension.arizona.edu/pubsion can be found at:
cals.arizona.edu/pubs
Any products, services, or organizations that are mentioned, shown, or indirectly implied in this publication
origin, age, disability, veteran status, or sexual orientation in its programs and activities.