--- Page 1 ---
az1800 September 2019
Prickly Pear Cactus:
Food of the Desert
Hope Wilson, Melissa Wyatt, Patricia Zilliox
Fruit Pad
pads themselves are actually a modified stem that is flat
(tunas) (nopal)
rather than round.1 Pads of the cactus are considered to be
either spineless or spine-containing, but both actually have
at least small spines. Prickly pear with spines have visible
thorns, while spineless varieties have glochids, which are
small areas on the pad where barbed bristles are located.
The leaves or pads of the prickly pear are often referred
to as nopales (or nopal, singular) when they are whole, and
as nopalitos when they are diced in food preparation.
Each cactus nopal can produce several flowers that bloom
in the spring. Once the blooms of these colorful flowers
fade, the fruits emerge3. The cactus flower, the fruit skin and
the pulp inside vary in color depending on the species. They
can be white, green, yellow, orange, red, purple, or brown.
The cactus fruits, called prickly pears, cactus pears, cactus
fruit, figs or tunas in Spanish, are oval-shaped berries with
glochids covering a juicy pulp inside (Figure 1). The fruits
vary considerably in color, size. They typically grow to
about 2 to 3 inches in length with larger fruits reaching 5
inches) depending upon the variety of prickly pear cacti.2,3
The flavor of the fruit may also differ depending on the
Figure 1: Prickly Pear fruit and pads. variety, but is most often compared to watermelon. The fruit
ripen during the warmest and driest months of the year.4
The varieties with dark reddish-orange or purple skins and
The prickly pear cactus can be found in desert regions of
deep red-purple flesh tend to be the sweetest available in
the Americas, ranging from Canada to the Southern regions
the United States.3
of South America.1 Even though it is native to the Americas,
it has been known to be grown around the world. In locations such as Australia, the prickly pear is
considered a pest1; however, in the Americas, Native
Just within the Sonoran Desert of Southwestern United
groups in the desert southwest have used the prickly pear
States and Mexico, there are 18 species of prickly pear.2
cactus as a source of food. Some Native groups including
Some of the commonly grown species in the Sonoran and
the Cahuilla, Akimel O’otham, and Tohono O’odham have
Mojave Deserts include Engelmann’s, Santa Rita, Indian
used the young cactus pads or nopales of the prickly pear.
Fig, and Beavertail.1 Information about common species
The Western Apache, Southern Tonto, Southern Yavapai
found in Arizona is listed on page 2.
and the Paipai exclusively harvest the fruits of the prickly
The prickly pear consists of cactus pads that are pear. The Tohono O’odham and Cahuilla use both the
segmented and grow on top of other pads (Figure 1). The cactus pad and fruits.5
--- Page 2 ---
Common Species of Prickly Pear Found in Arizona6
Beavertail Prickly Pear (Opuntia basilaris): This cactus is found in
Coconino, La Paz, Maricopa, Mohave, Yavapai and Yuma Counties in
Arizona. It grows at elevations of from sea level to up to 8,000 feet. The
pads are blue-grey in color with tan or redish-brown spines. Beavertail
bloom in the spring with a large dark-pink to light pink-flowers.
Opuntia basilaris in bloom (photo by Sue Smith, Yavapai
County Native & Naturalized Plants Database, cals.arizona.
edu/yavapaiplants)
Englemann Prickly Pear (Opuntia engelmannii): This cactus is found in
Cochise, Coconino, Gila, Graham, Greenlee, La Paz, Maricopa, Mohave,
Navajo, Pima, Pinal, Santa Cruz, Yavapai and Yuma Counties in Arizona.
It grows in elevations of 1,000 to 8,000 feet. Englemann Prickly Pear have
widely spaced white to yellow spines. The yellow to orange color flowers
bloom in spring. The fruits are deep red to purple in color.
Opuntia engelmannii with fruit (photo by Mary Barnes,
Mojave Prickly Pear (Opuntia erinacea): This cactus is found in Mohave
and Coconino Counties in Arizona. It grows at elevations of 3,500 to over
8,000 feet. The pads are oval with long, hair-like spines the vary in length.
The flowers bloom in spring ranging in color from yellow to dark pink.
Mature Mojave Prickly Pear fruit are dry becoming a spiny burr.
Opuntia erinacea in bloom (photo by Rokelle Reeve, Uni-
versity of Arizona)
Santa Rita Prickly Pear (Opuntia santa-rita): This cactus is found Cochise,
Pima and Santa Cruz Counties in Arizona. This cactus grows at elevations
of 2,000-5,300 feet. The pads for this cactus are round with bluish-gray to
purple color. The yellow flowers bloom in spring. The fruit on the Santa
Rita Prickly Pear are relatively small and reddish purple in color.
Opuntia santa-rita with distinct purple-coloring (photo by
Nora Graf, Yavapai County Master Gardener)
--- Page 3 ---
The Prickly Pear Pads in Cooking
Selecting and Harvesting the Cactus
Pads (Nopales)
Nopales are commonly found in markets and farmer’s
markets in the Southwest either fresh or preserved through
canning. However, when harvesting cactus pads, there a
few things to keep in mind.
Look for young and tender pads during spring when
they are considered the most succulent and have the fewest
spines.3 Fresh pads should be firm (full of water) and bright
green in color.7 (see Figure 2).
Use thick leather gloves when harvesting cactus pads
because their spines and glochids will penetrate skin easily.
Next, identify the pad you would like to remove. It should
be firm and without blemishes. Then, hold the top of the
pad gently in one hand and cut the pad from its supporting
pad with a sharp knife. It is recommended to harvest prickly
pear pads in the mid-morning hours when acid content is
at its lowest.
Figure 3: Removing the “eye” with the tip of the knife and tongs.
Wear gloves while preparing nopales that have spines in
place. Rinse nopales with water before removing spines.
Hold the base of the pad firmly and use a blunt knife to
scrape across the pad on an angle until all the spines and
tiny glochids are removed. Next, remove each ‘eye’ where
the spines were with the tip of the knife (see Figure 3). Then,
with a vegetable peeler, peel the pads on all sides and slice
according to the needs of the recipe.
Storing the Cactus Pads
Figure 2: Harvested nopales and tunas.
Raw pads can be stored in the refrigerator for about a
week. Nopalitos, or cut and diced fresh cactus leaves, should
Preparing the Cactus Pads be consumed or cooked as soon as possible.7
Nopales have a versatile flavor and texture and are often
Nutritional Content
compared to asparagus, okra, or French beans. They can be
used in a variety of ways including: eaten raw or sautéed or Nopales are good source of vitamin C, calcium, and
steamed and added to soups, stews, salads, and egg dishes. magnesium. One cup of raw nopales is 14 Calories and
Nopales are generally sold fresh with their spines removed, contains 13 percent of recommended daily value of vitamin
but they are also available canned and pickled, allowing C, 13% of calcium and 11% of magnesium. They contain
these vegetables to be available all year round.8 very little saturated fat and cholesterol.9
--- Page 4 ---
Recipe
Nopales and Scrambled Eggs10
Add nopales strips to pan.
Ingredients:
8 nopales (cactus pads)
1 small onion, finely chopped
1/2 teaspoon fine sea salt
6 eggs, lightly beaten
Makes 6 servings
Directions:
1. Prepare nopales as outlined in on page 3.
2. Cut the prepared nopales into 1/4-inch strips. Add onion and salt.
3. In a large frying pan, over medium high heat, heat the oil.
4. Add nopales to pan.
5. Add the onion and salt.
6. Cook, stirring frequently, until the nopales are tender
and most of their gel-like liquid has evaporated (15 to 20
minutes).
7. The nopales will turn from a bright green to more of an
olive color.
8. Add the eggs and cook, stirring until the eggs and nopales
are combined and the eggs are set (about 3 minutes).
Add eggs and cook.
Nutrition Information9
(1 serving)
Serving size: 5/6 cup (196 g)
Calories 110; Carbohydrates 7 g; Protein 9 g; Total Fat, 5 g;
Saturated Fat 2 g; Trans Fat 0 g;
Cholesterol 210 mg; Fiber 3 g; Total Sugars 3 g; Sodium,
300 mg; Vitamin D 6% DV; Calcium 15% DV; Iron 10% DV;
Cut nopales into 1/4 inch strips. Potassium 8% DV.
--- Page 5 ---
The Prickly Pear Fruit in Cooking
Selecting and Harvesting the Fruit Nutritional Content
Select fruit that is at the peak of ripeness for best quality The prickly pear fruit is an excellent source of dietary
and sweetness. Unlike many other fruits, prickly pear fruit fiber and vitamin C. One cup of raw fruit is 61 Calories and
will not continue to ripen once it has been picked. Mature contains 5 grams of fiber and 35 percent of recommended
fruit will be darker in color, such as dark red or purple, daily value of vitamin C. They contain very little sodium
and will be firm while also giving to gentle pressure. They and no saturated fat.9
should have a high percentage of pulp, low seed content,
and a peel that is easy to remove.2,3 Recipe
When harvesting fruit, always use tongs and thick gloves Prickly Pear Juice
to avoid contact with large spines and tiny glochids on the
pads and fruit. Twist, rather than pull the fruit from the pad
to avoid tearing it. 3,11,12
Preparing the Prickly Pear Fruit
The raw fruit can have a range of flavors, depending on
the variety. It may taste similar to watermelon, strawberries,
honeydew melons, figs, bananas, and citrus. It can be eaten
raw on its own; included as an ingredient in salads, fruit
salsas and desserts; used as a topping for cereal or ice cream
or the juice can also be boiled down into prickly pear syrup,
sauces, jelly or candy. The fruit’s round, black seeds can be
dried and ground into flour.3,8
The fresh prickly pears in the market have most of the
bristly spines removed. Some techniques for initially
removing the spines include singeing them off with fire or
scrubbing each fruit with a vegetable brush under running
water. Always rinse the fruit before removing spines. Once
glochids have been thoroughly removed, slit the skin in a
couple of places and use a fork to lift the skin and pull it off.
Then cut the fruit in half, remove seeds and slice or cube. 4,8,12 Preparation Method 1:13
It is recommended to wear plastic gloves while preparing
Glochids are removed from whole fruit before juice is
the fruit to prevent juice potentially staining hands.
extracted.
It is also possible to extract the prickly pear juice. To drink,
Directions
dilute the juice with water or add to lemonade or other
drinks to make a refreshing beverage. The juice can also be 1. Rinse fruit.
further processed to make jelly or syrup. 2. Remove all glochids as described in “Preparing the Prickly
Pear Fruit” section on this page.
Storing the Prickly Pear Fruit 3. Once the glochids are removed, cut the fruit into halves or
quarters.
Whole, ripe fruit will last about a week when stored in
4. Place the fruit into a blender or food processor and blend
cool temperatures, but not refrigerated. To keep longer
until the fruit is liquefied.
than a week, whole fruits can also be stored in the freezer
5. Remove the fruit from the blender by placing it in a fine
and processed later into juice after thawing. Juice can be
mesh strainer or strainer with cheese cloth that is over a
frozen into cubes by filling ice trays and putting into the
large bowl.
freezer until solid, then transferring the cubes to freeze
6. Strain the fruit through the strainer, pressing the fruit on
storage bags. 3,8,13
the side of the strainer to get as much juice as possible.
7. Approximately 12 fruits will make 1 cup of juice.
--- Page 6 ---
Preparation Method 2:13
Fruit are cooked to extract juice and glochids are removed
through straining juice.
Directions
1. Rinse fruit.
2. After rinsing, use tongs to place fruit on clean cutting
board and remove any damaged spots. It is not necessary
to remove the glochids as you would when preparing raw
or sliced fruit.
3. Wash fruit with a hard water spray and cut into halves.
4. Place washed fruit in a large pan and cover with water.
5. Cook the fruit for 10 minutes, then mash with a potato
masher and cook another 10 minutes.
6. Strain the slurry though a very fine mesh strainer or a
colander lined with cheese cloth or coffee filter.
7. Use a spoon to press the juice from the seeds and skins
Strain cooked, mashed fruit.
Clean fruit and remove damaged spots.
Press the juice from the seeds and skins through cheese cloth.
Cook and mash fruit.
--- Page 7 ---
References 13. Desert Harvesters. (2018, November 12). Prickly Pear
Cactus. Retrieved from Desert Harvesters: Appreciating
1. Bahto, C., & Bradley, L. (2003, June/July). The Prickly
the Native Foods of the Sonoran Desert: https://www.
Pear: Handle with Care! Master Gardener Journal (pp.
desertharvesters.org/native-plant-food-guides-the-
18-19). Phoenix, AZ: Maricopa County Master Gardeners,
desert-can-feed-you/prickly-pear/
14. Votto, M., & Manuel, F. (2010). From I’itoi’s Garden:
2. Cantwell, M. (2016). Prickly Pear. In C. Y. Gross KC, The
Tohono O’odham Food Traditions. Sells, AZ: Tohono
Commercial Storage of Fruits, Vegetables, and Florist
O’odham Community Action (TOCA).
and Nursery Stocks. Agriculture Handbook 66 (pp. 511-
513). Washington, DC.: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Agricultural Research Service.
3. Savio, Y. (2018, November 12). Prickly Pear Cactus
Production. Retrieved from University of California
ucdavis.edu/pubs/brochures/Pricklypear/
4. Murphy, H. (2018, November 12). Foods Indigenous to
the Western Hemisphere: Prickly Pear Cactus. Retrieved
from American Indian Health and Diet Project: web.
ku.edu/~aihd/foods/prickly_pear_cactus.html
5. Hogson, W. (2001). Food Plants of the Sonoran Desert.
6. Breslin, P. et al. (2015). Field Guide to Cacti and Other
Succulents of Arizona. Tucson: Tucson Cactus and
Succulent Society.
7. Hoe, P. (2013). The Edible Prickly Pear: Recipes Using
Fruits and Napoles. Albuquerque, NM: Cactus and
Succulent Society of New Mexico.
8. Washburn, C. (March 2011). Food $ense Guide to Eating
Fresh Fruits and Vegetables: Prickly Pear Cactus. UT:
9. Food Processor. Powered by the ESHA Research Nutrient
Database©
TUCson, ArizonA 85721
10. Flagstaff CSA and Local Market. (2018, November
hope Wilson
12). Nopales and Scrambled Eggs. Retrieved from
Area Assistant Agent, Family and Consumer Health Sciences
Recipe Exchange: http://flagcsarecipes.blogspot.
MelissA WyATT
com/2014/04/nopales-and-scrambled-eggs.html Area Assistant Agent, Family and Consumer Health Sciences
11. Holmes, B., Pelican, S., & Wilson, D. (Revised July 2011). pATriCiA zilliox
Education Consultant
Preserving Food in Wyoming: Wild Berries and Other
Fruit. Laramie, WY: University of Wyoming Cooperative ConTACT:
hope Wilson
hopewilson@email.arizona.edu
Resources.
This information has been reviewed
12. Bishop, C., McMurray, B. (2018, November 12). Eating by University faculty.
Cactus: Prickly Pear for Food (Fact Sheet-16-09). extension.arizona.edu/pubs/az1800-2019.pdf
can be found at:
Extension. https://www.unce.unr.edu/publications/
extension.arizona.edu/pubs
files/ag/2016/fs1609.pdf
Any products, services or organizations that are mentioned, shown or indirectly implied in this publication
age, disability, veteran status, sexual orientation, gender identity, or genetic information in its programs and activities.