--- Page 1 ---
az2021 January 2023
Arizona Landscape Palms and their Management
Ursula K. Schuch and Tanya M. Quist
Introduction
Palm trees offer versatility and dramatic impact can serve as a screen, provide shade, habitat, and create an
unparalleled among other desert adapted plants for low understory to enhance landscape diversity (Davison and
and mid elevation landscapes in Arizona. They broaden the Begeman, 2000).
plant palette for designers, contributing dramatic foliage,
Care should be exercised in selecting palms that are not
flower and fruit structures, bold shapes, diverse textures,
only well-adapted to the prevailing climate and microclimate
and sizes. Palms are treasured for creating a feeling of
but are also of appropriate size to be successful in the chosen
relaxed luxury and infusing the landscape with exotic and
site for many years. Several of the palm species listed below
tropical flavor. Although usually associated with iconic
for landscape use in Arizona grow up to 60 feet tall with a
California landscapes, many palm species work well in
canopy spread of 20-30 feet at maturity. Species differ in their
Arizona when selected and managed judiciously to ensure
maintenance requirements and pruning costs, especially if
long-term health and landscape sustainability. Palms
fruiting stalks need to be removed annually to prevent fruit
suitable for Arizona climates need to tolerate freezing
drop, will become more expensive as plants grow taller.
temperatures, high heat, and low humidity. This publication
covers 18 palm species that can be successfully cultivated Ecology and Climate Adaptation
in Arizona given appropriate growing conditions. We
With about 2,500 palm species in about 200 genera
describe how palms differ in form and growth from other
available worldwide, palms are among the best known, most
trees as a result of their unique biology, considerations
extensively cultivated and economically important plant
for using them effectively in the landscape, and cultural
families as a source of food, fiber and oils, and landscape
practices for planting, transplanting, maintaining, and
ornamentation (Hodel, 2012). Most palm trees are native to
controlling their pests and diseases. This content provides a
wet tropical regions, with few occurring in harsher climates,
basis for understanding suitability of various palm species
and even less occurring in subtropical, desert, and temperate
for Arizona climate and microclimates, and the long-term
climates. Arizona’s landscape palms should be chosen
commitment required to ensure performance, longevity
from this latter group as freezing temperatures in winter,
and aesthetic contribution to a landscape.
high temperatures in summer, and low humidity limit the
number of species for Arizona (Davison and Begeman,
Landscape Use
2000). Most species tolerant to the Arizona climate grow
Palms can be planted in groves, clusters or, placed singly
well below 4,000 feet elevation, and only a few can flourish
as accent specimens. Planted adjacent to swimming pools,
at higher elevations. Only one palm species, the California
patios, or smaller landscapes, palm trees instantly create fan palm (Washingtonia filifera), is native to the oases and
a tropical appeal. The strong, vertical form of tall species
canyons of western Arizona in the Kofa Mountains, in
balance the scale of large buildings and in mass plantings
southeastern California, and near Prescott, Arizona (Miller,
define boundaries of large spaces by lining parkways and
1983). Native and cultivated palm species have a wide
drives. Depending on the species, tall palms can be wispy
distribution in North America. In Arizona, there are many
and graceful or massive and bold. Grouping different palm
palm species that may be grown from Kingman to Yuma
species of various heights, color, and texture can provide a
along the Colorado River and up to 4,000 feet elevation in
focal point and add interest to a landscape setting. Palms
many parts of southern Arizona. The California fan, Mexican
--- Page 2 ---
fan, Mediterranean fan, windmill, Canary Island date and system early in their lives to support later vertical growth
Mexican blue palms can be grown in areas of USDA zone and all future development. Additionally, unlike eudicots
8a, where minimum temperatures can range from 10 to 15 and conifers which have hundreds of terminal growing
°F (-12.2 to -9.4 °C). However, these plants may benefit from points, palms have a single apical meristem. If the apical
a warmer microclimate and younger palms are still at risk meristem is damaged from lightning or other mechanical
of severe freeze damage. injury resulting in death of the growing point, the entire
plant will die as there is no other meristem to resume
Palms with marginal hardiness may be grown successfully
growth. Leaves, inflorescences, and flower structures all
in microclimates where they are protected from extreme low
emerge from the apical meristem.
and high temperatures, strong wind and arid conditions.
Although palms become more cold-hardy with age, avoid
Palm leaves, called fronds, are very large in size and
frost pockets, where cold air collects during the nighttime.
evergreen. Palms can be distinguished by their leaf shape,
When properly selected and placed in the site, palm trees
as fan palms have palmate leaves, while feather palm
will return benefits to the environment, such as shade,
have pinnate leaves. Palmate leaves are characterized by
atmospheric carbon sequestration, air filtration, storm
the leaf segments originating at the top of the petiole and
water mitigation, and soil erosion. Palms provide the same
joined almost to the tip. In feather palms the segments are
ecosystem services per unit of leaf area as most other trees,
individual leaflets that are not joined and originate from the
however, because palms have smaller canopies, more
rachis, which is the extension of the petiole. Leaves consist
plants are required to achieve equivalent per-tree benefits.
of a blade, petiole and base. The leaf blade is the expanded
Understanding the unique aspects of palm tree biology aids
leaf surface, which is either pleated or flat, depending on the
proper selection, installation and management.
species. Petioles support the massive leaves, but they are
also flexible to allow leaves to bend in the wind. Petioles
Palm Morphology and Anatomy
may be toothed, or armed, along the margins.
Palm trees are fibrous trunked, often referred to as woody New fronds emerge in the center of the apical meristem
monocots in the botanical family Arecaceae. They differ in and are surrounded by the older leaves, with the crown
their development and growth from woody eudicots and forming a spherical shape. Palms require an optimal
conifers. Most species are characterized by a single straight number of leaves to support growth and maintenance of
trunk without side branches although there are some species the mature tree. Prior to vertical stem growth occurring, the
with multiple trunks originating at the base. leaf crown attains maximum size and the leaf number and
Palm stems or trunks are composed of pseudobark, cortex, the transport capacity through the vascular system becomes
and a central cylinder. The pseudobark covering of palm fixed. Leaves present beyond this number senesce and are
trunks, unlike the bark of eudicot or conifer trees, consists shed or persist as a dried leaf skirt.
of sclerified or hardened cells. The remainder of the cortex
Palm flowers individually are inconspicuous. However, as
forms a narrow band of mostly parenchyma cells, around
aggregated into a flower head or inflorescence, they can be
the trunk diameter, that lignify with age and give strength to
showy and more massive than the leaves, ranging in length
the stem. The central cylinder consists of vascular bundles
from two to twenty feet. Flowers develop into fleshy fruits,
containing both xylem and phloem to transport water,
such as drupes or berries.
minerals, and carbohydrates. These vascular bundles,
enclosed by a rigid, fibrous sheath that also contributes
Palm roots are typical for monocots, being fibrous, they
structural support to the stem, are dispersed throughout the
are composed of many slender primary roots. These
central cylinder, with the majority near the cortex.
adventitious roots arise from the base of the trunk in the
Unlike eudicots and conifers, palms do not have a root initiation zone. The root initiation zone is associated
secondary cambium in the stem. As such palms do not with a flared base of the trunk as part of this zone can be
produce annual growth rings. Further, because they lack above ground, allowing roots to be visible at the base of the
secondary cambium, wounds do not close, but remain trunk. Palm roots emerge with their final diameter and will
visible throughout the life of the palm. The surface of palm not grow large and woody like eudicots and conifers. These
trunks can vary from smooth, slightly rough to very rough root features allow for transplanting of large palm trees
and some species show the leaf scars where leaves have where the shallow, fibrous root system can be successfully
been pruned off. During their juvenile development, palms dug up and moved. This development pattern also prevents
grow to their final stem diameter and produce a full canopy the root–pavement conflicts caused by many eudicot and
of leaves, then start to grow in height without further conifer trees as they expand in trunk diameter.
horizontal stem expansion. This development means that The majority of the root system of palms is located in the
palms must produce enough leaf area and adequate vascular top foot of the soil and near the base of the trunk. However,
--- Page 3 ---
palm roots extend horizontally, in large specimens of the original root ball as needed to keep the soil moist
considerable distance from the trunk. When palm roots but not saturated. Expand the irrigation away from the
are cut, most species initiate new roots behind the cut, trunk over time to accommodate new root growth into the
producing smaller size secondary and tertiary roots. A few surrounding soil.
species initiate new roots only from the root initiation zone
To reduce nutrient deficiency, fertilize palms with a
but not close to a cut.
palm specialty fertilizer placed on top of the soil following
transplanting of palms from containers (Broschat, 2009).
Planting and Transplanting
Cover the soil with organic mulch, keeping the mulch away
Palms are usually transplanted into the landscape from from the trunk base.
container grown, field-grown, transplanted, or large boxed
specimens. The nature of the root system allows for even Transplanting Field Grown Palms
very large specimens to be transplanted readily to a new site,
Large palms unlike other large trees can be successfully
providing the instant gratification of a mature landscape.
transplanted due to their single trunk, lack of branches,
The best time to transplant palms in the Southwestern
and fibrous, relatively shallow root system. Transplanting
United States is from May to July when soil temperatures
large palms requires heavy equipment and should be done
above 65°F (18.3°C) stimulate new root regeneration and
by professionals with suitable expertise. When installing
growth leading to fast establishment. Transplanting palms
field-grown and transplanted trees, additional care should
during the cool season delays root growth and can stress
be taken. Large landscape palms must be handled gently in
the plants, resulting in poor establishment. Planting hole
all phases of the transplanting operation. The primary focus
preparation, setting the plant at the correct depth, proper
of transplanting activities should be to protect the terminal
backfill, and irrigation, fertilization, and mulching following
bud from rough handling or bumping during excavation,
transplanting are all important factors for successful
transit, and planting. If the terminal bud is damaged, death
establishment.
of the tree will occur shortly thereafter. For this reason,
the terminal bud is often protected by binding to a splint
Planting Container Grown Palms
during the transplanting process. Attention should be
Smaller palms grown in containers are planted by digging given to protecting the trunk by bracing and wrapping it
the planting hole as deep as the root ball and about twice as during excavation, transit, and planting, so as to minimize
wide. However, on large specimens, the hole need only be mechanical stress on the trunk and reduce opportunity for
about six inches wider on all sides. Palms thrive in well- wounding (Hodel, 2013).
drained soil so the drainage in the area where palms will be Juvenile palms should have reached their mature diameter
placed needs to be tested before planting. It is critical that if they are scheduled for transplanting or should be dug
the palm is planted with the interface between the roots with a larger root ball. Plants should be well watered before
and trunk at or slightly below the soil line, but the trunk digging them from their current location. In preparation
should never be buried in the soil. Planting too deep often for transplanting, palm fronds are bundled and tied
results in death of the palm due to lack of oxygen for energy together to protect both the apical meristem and the fronds
production, or root diseases. Disturbing the outside of the during transport. In moderate climates, fronds should be
root ball is usually not necessary since the fibrous palm untied immediately after transplanting. Removing green
roots do not encircle the root ball and new roots will start fronds from the base of the canopy during transplanting
growing from the root initiation zone after transplanting is not recommended in moderate to warm climates with
(Hodel, 2013). higher relative humidity. However, in extremely hot,
Soil dug from the planting hole should be used as backfill, arid conditions, green fronds can be removed prior to
no amendments should be added. The use of unamended transplanting to reduce water loss through transpiration.
builder’s or concrete sand as the sole backfill material Nonetheless, the number of fronds to be removed should
might help provide support and stability to large and tall be minimized as it takes years for the canopy to produce
specimens. Backfill should be gently tamped around the new fronds. Further, in hot dry climates, palms benefit from
root ball and immediately watered to settle. Creating a keeping the fronds tied for some time after transplanting
temporary irrigation berm just past the perimeter of the (Pittenger et al., 2005).
planting hole ensures that the entire root ball and the backfill The size of the root ball to be dug depends on the species
will be saturated upon irrigation. The irrigation interval will and the plant size. Root balls should be a minimum of 12
vary depending on the weather and characteristics of the inches in diameter and depth. Standard industry practice is
palm. Manually and visually check the original root ball, up to 18 inches in radius from the trunk for palm trees up
backfill, and surrounding site soil and irrigate to the depth to 65 feet. Since most palm species initiate new roots from
--- Page 4 ---
cut roots, they establish quickly after being transplanted. required no additional water if they are grown in a coastal
A smaller root ball, that is one to two feet wider than the Mediterranean climate (Pittenger et al., 2009), however,
trunk, and one to three feet deep will usually be sufficient. in the arid climates of Arizona some irrigation during the
Large plants benefit from a deeper and wider root ball summer months benefits these plants. Windmill palm and
which better anchors the plant, especially taller ones, in the queen palm require supplemental irrigation year-round
new location. While palms regenerate roots readily under even in a coastal climate.
optimal conditions, healthy roots are needed for this to
Overwatering can result in vertical trunk splitting in
occur. In general, a larger root ball will reduce incidence of
landscape palms, creating an entry point for disease.
stress and enhance the resilience of the newly planted tree
Consistent water from adjacent sprinklers striking the
when adverse conditions develop. Covering the root ball
pseudobark can result in trunk erosion and staining. In
during transport with burlap will preserve its integrity and
this case, the pseudobark, cortex and central cylinder erode
protect it from drying out. While some eudicot trees are
giving the trunk a shaggy appearance and leaving the trunk
root pruned in the field before transplanting to stimulate
vulnerable to infection. Mineral deposition on the trunk
new root growth, this practice is not beneficial for palms
only affects the appearance of the tree, but is not known
(Pittenger et al., 2005).
to impact tree health. Constant moisture on the base of the
The region where roots meet the trunk should be planted trunk may lead to the formation of aerial root proliferations.
at grade or one inch below the soil surface, but not deeper. Large masses of adventitious roots emerge up to ten feet
Burying the trunk of palms leads to plant death for any size from the trunk base. These growths primarily affect tree
palm. Backfill should consist of well-draining soil from the aesthetics and do not impact structural integrity or tree
original planting hole or sand, especially if the soil is not well health.
drained. Plants require irrigation of the original root ball,
Fertilization – Regular fertilization to prevent nutrient
the backfill, and the surrounding soil after transplanting.
deficiencies is important to palm health and appearance.
Establishing a berm as described above will keep this area
Once leaves show a nutrient deficiency they cannot recover
well irrigated during establishment and is key to maintain
and will display this damage until they have been replaced
healthy palms. Field grown or transplanted palms should
with new foliage (Broschat, 2009). Fertilization should begin
be fertilized within a few months after transplanting to
immediately after transplanting for transplanted container
prevent nutrient deficiencies and support establishment.
palms and several months after transplanting for larger
The addition of root hormones or mycorrhizae to the root
specimens from the field or landscape. Since nitrogen is the
ball has not been shown to stimulate new root growth or
nutrient needed in greatest quantities, it is the most likely to
benefit the plant. Mulching the root zone around the trunk
be deficient in Arizona landscape palms. Like nitrogen (N),
supports root establishment and conserves water (Hodel,
potassium (K) and magnesium (Mg) are also macronutrients
2013).
needed in greatest quantities to prevent deficiencies.
Large palms planted in areas with strong winds may
Phosphorous (P) is not needed in large amounts. Of the
require bracing for one season to allow the new root system
micronutrients, manganese (Mn) is needed at 1-2%, while
to develop and anchor the plant. Wood, or guy wires
only trace amounts of iron, zinc and copper are needed for
attached to a wooden brace, strapped around the trunk can
healthy palms. For best effect, N, K, Mg, and B should be in
be used as supports. Supports should not be nailed directly
a form that releases slowly while other micronutrients (Mn,
to the trunk as these wounds will remain for the life of the
iron, zinc, and copper) should be in sulfate or chelated form
tree.
(Broschat, 2021). An example of a palm fertilizer specially
developed for palm maintenance is 8N-2PO-12KO+4Mg
Cultural Practices for Established 2 5 2
with micronutrients. The correct ratios of the different
Palms
macronutrients are important to meet plant needs; if they
Irrigation – It is generally accepted that deep watering are not in the correct ratio, the plant can suffer as a result of
is crucial and that no palm, even an arid desert native, is nutrient competition for uptake. For example, application
really drought tolerant, since these grow in oases. Sufficient, of excessively high N fertilizer can kill a palm due to the
deep irrigation promotes a healthy tree, adequate growth resulting deficiency in potassium.
rate, disease tolerance, and pest resistance. Wetting the soil Nutrient deficiencies become apparent as fronds change
at least 4-6 feet beyond the trunk and at least 2 feet deep color from green to light yellow, develop necrotic spots, or
maintains a healthy plant. How often to irrigate depends on show dieback of leaflets and parts of the frond (Broschat,
the soil texture, weather, and when the top of the soil profile 2009). Symptoms vary by species and may start on the oldest
dries out. Palm species differ in their water requirements. or youngest fronds. When grown in sandy soils, queen
Some species including California and Mexican fan palms palms and date palms are especially sensitive to potassium
--- Page 5 ---
deficiency. Nutrient deficiencies can often be corrected with Routine annual pruning is often scheduled in summer after
the application of the nutrient that is low in supply, however, flower stalks have emerged to allow both fronds and flower
it can take several years for this to correct deficiencies and or fruit stalks to be removed at the same time. For fronds
fronds that have developed symptoms of discoloration or that were damaged by freezing temperatures, they should be
dieback will often not be able to recover. Those fronds will be removed after the risk of cold injury has passed.
removed when they eventually turn brown, but should not Pruning practices include removing fronds by cutting the
be cut off as long as they have some green tissue. petiole or leaf base as close to the trunk as possible. Ideally,
Initial symptoms of nitrogen appear as light green foliage only leaf bases or petioles that easily fall or pull away from
coloration which eventually develops into yellowing of older the trunk should be removed. Peeling or skinning trunks
fronds and ultimately spreading chlorosis through the entire to remove petiole remnants and leaf bases is typically
canopy if the deficiency persists. Palms are high potassium unnecessary and may wound the pseudobark, cortex, and
users and may show deficiency symptoms on older leaves even the central cylinder and transmit disease. Avoid pruning
with yellow speckles appearing first on the tip of the frond any living leaves attached above the horizontal plane (prune
and later progressing throughout the leaf blade and midrib. leaves no higher than nine and three o’clock). Palms that
Overwatering or application of high nitrogen fertilizers are consistently over-pruned develop weakness and often
can promote potassium deficiency. Fronds affected by break in the wind. Removal of leaves displaying deficiency
magnesium deficiency turn yellow while the midrib remains symptoms of mobile nutrients, including potassium and
green. Magnesium deficiency affects older leaves first and magnesium, should be avoided, to allow these nutrients to
manifests as a yellowing, chlorotic tissue on the tip of the be transported to other areas of the plant.
leaflets or blade moving towards the base which remains How much to prune? Because palms have large leaves,
green. If the deficiency worsens, the entire frond including their photosynthetic surface area is effectively concentrated,
the midrib can turn yellow. such that, a single extra cut can significantly reduce the
In Arizona, palms should be fertilized twice per year when tree’s capacity to support healthy growth and repair. When
the soil is warm and roots are active. For established trees, considering how much to prune, a good rule of thumb is to
apply a palm-specialty fertilizer in spring and mid-summer. restrict pruning to no more than twenty-five percent of the
Controlled release granular fertilizers provide a steady living canopy in a season, and avoid pruning more than once
supply of nutrients, and minimize leaching and runoff. per season.
Apply the product according to package directions. Spread During pruning or other palm maintenance, no nails
the product under the canopy but away from the trunk. or spikes should be used to climb the tree. Wounds are
Water thoroughly, to a depth of 12 inches, to release nutrients permanent as the tree has no cambium to grow over it and
into the soil. may leave the tree open to infection from diseases.
Pruning – Palm tree pruning requirements vary by species. Pests and Diseases
Generally, as new foliage is produced from the terminal bud,
lower fronds senesce and turn brown. These dead, lower Integrated pest management is the preferred strategy for
fronds may persist or they may fall off. When they persist, dealing with palm disease and insects. Prevention should
they form a thatch called a “shag” or “skirt” that may be be a priority in palm management as it is often the best, and
retained for trunk protection or historic character, or which sometimes the only means to treat a diseased tree. Healthy,
may be pruned to reduce the hazard of falling debris or to adapted palms are less likely to attract insect pests and are
enhance the tree’s appearance. In all cases, rules governing better able to resist infection. Disease and insect infestations
pruning include: (1) defining a clear reason for each cut, (2) are rarely observed on properly selected and well managed
pruning at the correct time, and (3) following correct practices palm trees. Some of the common pests (Elliott et al., 2010;
like those described in the ANSI standards for pruning Hodel, 2012) and diseases (Olsen, 1999; Hodel, 2012)
available through the International Society of Arboriculture. affecting Arizona landscape palms are described here.
▪ Texas Root Rot –
Reasons to prune include removing unwanted, dead
▫ Causal Agent: Phymatotrichum omnivorum, a fungal
or diseased leaves, living and dead inflorescences and
pathogen.
infructescences (fruiting stalks), or unwanted trunks of
▫ Host range: All palms (and other monocots) are resistant
multi-trunk species. Green, living leaves should only be
to Texas root rot, but may act as carriers.
removed in preparation for transplanting in very hot, arid ▫ Symptoms: Palms will not show symptoms of the disease.
climates so as to reduce surface area and resulting water loss.
▫ Transmission: Transplanted palms can carry the
Removal of green leaves is strongly discouraged as this limits disease and infect other adjacent plants. They should
photosynthesis, reduces energy production and storage, be tested to determine if the disease is present prior to
ultimately weakening the plant. transplanting to prevent disease spread.
--- Page 6 ---
▪ Diamond Scale – been identified in Arizona in 2016.
▫ Causal agent: Sphaerodothus neowashingtonia, a fungal
▫ Transmission and Disease Mechanism: Direct infection
pathogen.
occurs almost exclusively through contaminated
▫ Host range: Washingtonia filifera, hybrids of W. robusta pruning tools but infection may also be transmitted
with W. filifera. indirectly by drift of spore-containing sawdust and
▫ Transmission and Disease Mechanism: Wind and movement of contaminated soil and water to adjacent
water-borne spores from the pathogen infect all parts plants.
of the plant. Cool, humid nights in early summer ▫ Symptoms and Diagnostic Indicators: Lower leaves
encourage infection with symptoms appearing later in turn yellow, then brown often with leaflets on one side
the dry, warm summer or fall months. This disease is of the leaf axis becoming brown first. Rapid death of
rare in Arizona. the crown, dead leaves persist. Vascular discoloration
▫ Symptoms and Diagnostic Indicators: Dark, water and streaking will also appear.
soaked spots in the foliage, which later turn into larger, ▫ Treatments: This disease is fatal and there is no
black diamond shaped fruiting bodies aligned along treatment for diseased trees. Excellent cultural
the long axis of the host foliage. Heavily infected practices will effectively prevent the disease or
tissues are covered by a sooty dust. facilitate disease management. Especially important
▫ Treatments: Avoid use of W. filifera where the disease are the use of quality well-composted, disease free
occurs. Otherwise, attempt prevention through mulch, proper irrigation, good drainage and use of
improved cultural practices including adequate manual pruning saws which need to be disinfested
irrigation, fertilization, and cultivation of healthy soils. between trees.
▪ Thielaviopsis Rot – • Ganoderma Root Rot –
▫ Causal agent: Thielaviopsis paradoxa, a fungal pathogen. ▫ Causal agent: Ganoderma zonatum affects landscape
palms commonly planted in the Southwest.
▫ Host range: Many palm species are susceptible. In
Arizona, the disease has been identified on Phoenix ▫ Host range: Phoenix spp., Washingtonia spp. in Arizona,
dactylifera and Syagrus romanzoffiana. and sixty-five other palms in Florida.
▫ Transmission and Disease Mechanism: Spores are ▫ Transmission and Disease Mechanism: Reddish-brown
mechanically transmitted on pruning saws and on spores are released from mature conks, germinate in
climbing spikes. Incidence of disease increases with the soil and infest the roots.
pruning of green tissue, poor irrigation, and high soil ▫ Symptoms and Diagnostic Indicators: Wilting leaves,
salinity. reduced growth resulting from vascular deterioration,
▫ Symptoms and Diagnostic Indicators: Crown and/ and evidence of rotting primarily at the base of the
or bud rot, trunk rot and root rot. In Arizona, the trunk. (For this reason, this disease is sometimes
most common infections are in the main trunk and called butt rot). Initially, the trunk base will show dark
in fronds. Old leaves die back and trunk may appear colored, swollen and distorted areas but will later
discolored, or bent revealing rot and weakness that produce a small, flattened, white fungal conk which
progresses from the outer pseudobark to the central matures into a brownish half-moon shaped mature
cylinder. While some trees that have failed due to structure.
sudden crown drop have this pathogen present, it ▫ Treatments: No specific factors are known to pre-
is not confirmed as a causal agent for this notorious dispose palms to ganoderma root rot. Regular
disease. Other diagnostic indicators of Thielaviopsis monitoring for conks and swift removal of the tree
rot include discoloration of leaf petioles or trunk, and limits disease spread. Burning the lower portion of the
microscopic identification or culture of the spores. diseased trunk is recommended.
▫ Treatments: There is no control for Thielaviopsis rot. • False Smut –
Prevention is the best means to control the disease by ▫ Causal agent: Graphiola phoenicis.
use of clean tools between trees and selection of clean
▫ Host range: P. canariensis, P. dactylifera mostly, but
trees when purchasing or transplanting.
also known to affect an additional thirty other palm
• Fusarium Wilt – species.
▫ Causal agent: Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. canariensis. ▫ Transmission and Disease Mechanism: Water and
wind-borne spores affect leaves that are wet for
▫ Host: Phoenix canariensis
prolonged periods.
▫ Fusarium wilt of queen and Mexican fan palm has
--- Page 7 ---
▫ Symptoms and Diagnostic Indicators: Nuisance ▫ Transmission and Disease Mechanism: Trees in the
disease that results in death of individual leaves over wild carry the beetle, which can attack adjacent
several years. Symptoms initially resemble potassium cultivated landscape trees or be directly moved into
deficiency with yellow spots appearing on leaflets early the landscape on wild-transplanted trees. Larvae
on and black, cup-shaped fruiting bodies appearing on hatch from nests at the base of petioles before
leaves later. burrowing into soft tissues of the leaf bases and
▫ Treatments: Prevention with proper irrigation eventually, throughout the whole trunk.
(i.e. morning irrigation, avoiding wet leaves) and ▫ Symptoms and Diagnostic Indicators: A labyrinth
sanitation. Timely application of thiophanate methyl of tunnels is created throughout the trunk by the
fungicides and copper compounds will suppress chewing larvae. Some reports of audible chewing
disease development. sounds and snapping trunk fibers in heavily infested
trees.
• Phytophthora Bud and Collar Rot –
▫ Treatments: No reliable detection system is reported.
▫ Causal agent: Phytophthora sp., a water-mold
Appropriate cultural care of trees may reduce attacks.
▫ Host range: Washingtonia filifera, and W. robusta
Birds, like the common flicker and ladder-backed
primarily, but with Syagrus romanzoffiana, and Butia
Gila woodpeckers are natural predators.
capitata affected to a lesser degree.
• Fan Palm Caterpillar –
▫ Transmission and Disease Mechanism: Splashing
▫ Causal agent: Litoprosopus coachella, a one-inch-long,
water, movement of infected plants, and frequently
pink-green-colored caterpillar larvae.
wet foliage favor development of the disease.
▫ Host range: Washingtonia filifera and W. robusta.
▫ Symptoms and Diagnostic Indicators: Reduced
▫ Transmission and Disease Mechanism: Larvae
growth and vigor precede loss of leaf color, chlorosis
consume flowers and move to the leaf bases to pupate.
and death. Leaf death first affects young leaves along
▫ Symptoms and Diagnostic Indicators: Serious
with rotting of the apical bud.
injury is unlikely, but damage inflicted by this pest
▫ Treatments: Prevention by excluding diseased plants
may predispose trees to infection by other pests or
as well as proper sanitation and appropriate irrigation
pathogens.
management reduce incidence. Fungicides are useful
▫ Treatments: Early removal of inflorescences reduces
in preventing the disease in small plants, but are
populations.
mostly ineffective for mature landscape specimens.
• Root Knot Nematode -
• Pink Rot –
▫ Causal agent: Meloidogyne spp. (Olsen, 2011)
▫ Causal agent: Nalanthamala vermoeseni (Gliocladium
▫ Host range: Most landscape plants including trees,
vermoeseni)
shrubs, vegetables and bedding plants can serve as a
▫ Host range: Phoenix spp. Howea forsteriana, Syagrus
host for the nematode. Palms affected by nematodes
romanzoffiana, Trachycarpus fortunei, Washingtonia filifera
include Washingtonia filifera, W. robusta, Chamaerops
and W. robusta.
humilis, and Trachycarpus fortunei.
▫ Transmission and Disease Mechanism: An
▫ Transmission and Disease Mechanism: Nematodes
opportunistic, secondary infection that afflicts stressed,
invade small feeder roots and limit uptake of
wounded, diseased, or older palms.
nutrients and water. Their activity increases in warm,
▫ Symptoms and Diagnostic Indicators: Leaf and rachis moist, sandy soils.
spots and rots with pinkish masses of spores often
▫ Symptoms and Diagnostic Indicators: Newly
visible in the cross section of the leaf bases.
emerged fronds appear bunchy and small and severe
▫ Treatments: Minimize wounding and plant stress from infections can be fatal for the tree. Infected roots will
abiotic (water, temperature, salinity, wounding etc.) display very small nodules.
and other biotic factors by selecting adapted plants, ▫ Treatments: Impossible to eradicate once soils are
and through excellent cultural and sanitation practices. infected. Soil can be solarized before replanting the
infested site with vigorous, resistant plants with
• Giant Palm Borer -
healthy root systems.
▫ Causal agent: Dinapate wrightii, a beetle.
▫ Host range: Washingtonia filifera and Phoenix dactylifera.
--- Page 8 ---
Palms for Arizona flower stalks 18 feet or more in length. Some consider
it better appearing in youth because mature specimens
▪ Scientific Name: Bismarckia nobilis
develop a stockier trunk and the foliage has a less
pronounced blue color.
▫ Landscape Use: This beautiful tree offers much
versatility as a landscape palm or as a container subject.
The attractive blue foliage makes a nice contrast with
desert vegetation.
▫ Foliage: Evergreen
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 8-11/Sunset H1, and 10-24
▫ Height: 25’-30’
▫ Light Exposure: Part shade, full or reflected sun
▫ Spread: 6’-10’
▫ Common Name: Bismarck palm ▫ Water Use: Low to medium
▫ Palm Type: Fan ▫ Growth Rate: Slow
▫ Description: Nearly rounded, grayish green to silvery- ▫ Trunk Width: 2’
blue-green leaves are 8’-10’ across. The 5’ long petiole ▫ Cultural Requirements: Mexican blue palm tolerates
is covered with cinnamon colored scales. extremes of heat, cold, wind and a wide range of
▫ Landscape Use: Striking color and form make this growing conditions. Regular, widely spaced irrigation
plant an ideal specimen plant. is best.
▫ Foliage: Evergreen ▫ Problems: None reported.
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 9-11/ Sunset 13-17, and 19-24
▪ Scientific Name: Brahea brandegeei
Height: 6’-60’ (usually 30’ in cultivation)
▫ Light Exposure: Full sun
▫ Spread: 20’-25’
▫ Water Use: Moderate
▫ Growth Rate: Fast
▫ Trunk Width: Solitary trunk of 2’ diameter
▫ Cultural Requirements: This species is highly tolerant
of intense heat, where it will grow more slowly than in
humid and moderate climates. Good moisture supply
with good drainage is best. Cold hardy down to 22ºF,
but will recover if the bud is protected.
▫ Problems: This tree is appropriate for protected regions
of USDA Zone 9 and Sunset Zone 13, where they may
▫ Common Name: San Jose Hesper palm
experience cold injury, but will recover in one season.
▫ Palm Type: Fan
▪ Scientific Name: Brahea armata ▫ Description: Tallest of the Brahea genus. Appearance is
similar to Washingtonia robusta with persistent, 3’ long
green fronds with light gray undersides, and attractive,
patterned trunk.
▫ Landscape Use: Tall, slender palm to accent height in
diverse landscapes.
▫ Foliage: Evergreen
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 9a-11, Sunset 13-24
▫ Height: 40’-60’ (potentially up to 125’)
▫ Light Exposure: Full sun
▫ Spread: 7’
▫ Water Use: Low
▫ Growth Rate: Moderate to fast.
▫ Common Name: Mexican blue palm
▫ Trunk Width: 12” and solitary.
▫ Palm Type: Fan
▫ Cultural Requirements: Thrives in hot locations with
▫ Description: Waxy, silvery-blue leaves arch gracefully
little humidity. Is highly tolerant of drought, and will
from the erect columnar trunk of this striking palm.
tolerate freezing temperatures.
Faintly fragrant, creamy white flowers are arrayed on
--- Page 9 ---
▫ Problems: Leaf damage below 25°F, and very limited create a graceful, cascading crown. The stocky trunk
availability in trade. becomes patterned with the stubs of old leaf bases with
age. Females bear large clusters of edible (pineapple
▪ Scientific Name: Brahea edulis
flavored) fruits.
▫ Landscape Use: Ideal as a low, bushy specimen in the
garden. It is attractive when interplanted among tall,
slender palms for contrast. It is also suitable for large
containers or tubs.
▫ Foliage: Evergreen
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 7-10/ Sunset H1, and 8-24
▫ Height: 10’ – 20’
▫ Light Exposure: Part shade, full or reflected sun.
▫ Spread: 5’ – 15’
▫ Water Use: Medium to high.
▫ Common Name: Guadalupe fan palm ▫ Growth Rate: Slow.
▫ Palm Type: Fan ▫ Trunk Width: 1’ – 2’
▫ Description: A robust, handsome palm similar to ▫ Cultural Requirements: Old fronds need to be cut
Mexican blue palm but with less conspicuous flowers. evenly to avoid a ragged appearance. Deep, infrequent
Large, medium green leaves hold their color well irrigation is best.
through the winter and shed cleanly. Flowers appear ▫ Problems: Iron chlorosis can occur in alkaline, or
on 4-5 foot long stalks and are followed by heavy poorly drained soils. Susceptible to bud rot and root-
clusters of small, black barely edible fruit. knot nematodes.
▫ Landscape Use: This fan palm is excellent as a
▪ Scientific Name: Chamaerops humilis
specimen, in groups, or as a container plant when
young. It is more effective for smaller scale use than
Washingtonias.
▫ Foliage: Evergreen
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 9-11, Sunset 12-17, 19-24
▫ Height: 20’-30’
▫ Light Exposure: Part shade, full or reflected sun
▫ Spread: 8’-10’
▫ Water Use: Low to medium
▫ Growth Rate: Slow to moderate
▫ Common Name: Mediterranean fan palm
▫ Trunk Width: 1.5’
▫ Palm Type: Fan
▫ Cultural Requirements: This species adapts to a wide
▫ Description: This slow grower is one of the most
variety of soil and cultural conditions. Deep, infrequent cold-hardy of all palms. The distinctive fan-shaped
irrigation is best. fronds are composed of stiff, blue-green to gray-green
▫ Problems: None recorded in Arizona. segments. These eventually form a compact head at
the end of each curved stem. In Arizona, the bushy,
▪ Scientific Name: Butia capitata
multi-trunked type is the most commonly used form
of this highly variable species.
▫ Landscape Use: The suckering habit eventually results
in pleasing stem groupings and enhanced landscape
interest. This small palm makes a striking accent plant
against architectural features. It is one of the best
species for containers as well as for massing at the base
of taller growing palms.
▫ Foliage: Evergreen
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 8-14/Sunset H1, H2, and 4-24
▫ Height: 5’-15’
▫ Light Exposure: Part shade to full sun
▫ Common Name: Pindo palm ▫ Spread: 5’-20’
▫ Palm Type: Feather ▫ Water Use: Low, medium or high
▫ Growth Rate: Slow
▫ Description: Gray-green, strongly recurved fronds
--- Page 10 ---
▫ Trunk Width: Clumping ▫ Description: Chinese fountain palm develops a
▫ Cultural Requirements: Mediterranean fan palm rounded fountain-like crown of graceful leaves atop
survives much neglect but grows best in rich soil with a slender trunk. The shiny, bright green foliage forms
ample water. Some pruning may be necessary to limit a distinctive fringe of drooping leaf tips on mature
the number of stems and to remove old fronds. plants. The large 3- to 5-foot fans are self-cleaning,
▫ Problems: None recorded in Arizona leaving an attractive, leaf-scarred trunk.
▫ Landscape Use: A striking landscape specimen for
▪ Scientific Name: Jubaea chilensis
warm winter areas. Tolerance of low light conditions
makes it an excellent plant for indoor use when young.
It is not commonly available in Arizona.
▫ Foliage: Evergreen
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 9-12/Sunset H1, H2, 9, 13-17,
and 19-24
▫ Height: 15’-25’
▫ Light Exposure: Part shade
▫ Spread: 10’-15’
▫ Water Use: Medium to high
▫ Growth Rate: Slow to moderate
▫ Trunk Width: 1’-1.5’
▫ Cultural Requirements: Afternoon shade is important
in hot desert climates
▫ Common Name: Chilean wine palm
▫ Problems: Frost damage is likely in cold microclimates
▫ Palm Type: Feather
▫ Description: The Chilean wine palm develops a ▪ Scientific Name: Phoenix canariensis
massive, columnar trunk which is one of the thickest of
all palms. This self-pruning species forms a handsome
patterned surface on the gray trunk. The dense feather-
duster crown is made up of stiff, bristling leaves.
▫ Landscape Use: The massive character of Chilean wine
palm merits its use as a specimen in parks and large
garden areas.
▫ Foliage: Evergreen
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 9-10a, Sunset 12-24
▫ Height: 50’-80’
▫ Light Exposure: Full sun
▫ Spread: 20’-30’
▫ Water Use: Medium to high
▫ Common Name: Canary Island date palm
▫ Growth Rate: Extremely slow
▫ Palm Type: Feather
▫ Trunk Width: 3’-4’
▫ Description: Canary Island date palm is a large, wide-
▫ Cultural Requirements: Regular watering and
spreading feather palm of majestic proportions. The
fertilization is best.
glistening, dark green leaves are long and arching,
▫ Problems: Not commonly available in Arizona. giving the crown a distinct fountain-like outline and
▪ Scientific Name: Livistona chinensis form. The trunk of young trees is typically covered
with persistent leaf bases giving a pineapple-like
appearance. Female trees produce clusters of orange-
yellow fruit in the fall.
▫ Landscape Use: Most effectively used along avenues,
in parks, and large commercial and residential
landscapes. Young trees make attractive and
undemanding container subjects.
▫ Foliage: Evergreen
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 8-13/Sunset H1, H2, 8, 9, and
12-24
▫ Height: 40’-50’
▫ Light Exposure: Part shade, full or reflected sun
▫ Spread: 20’-40’
▫ Common Name: Chinese fountain palm ▫ Water Use: Medium to high
▫ Palm Type: Fan ▫ Growth Rate: Slow
--- Page 11 ---
▫ Trunk Width: 2’-3’ ▪ Scientific Name: Phoenix reclinata
▫ Cultural Requirements: Deep, regular irrigation and
fertilization encourages faster growth. Periodic pruning
and grooming are necessary for best appearance.
▫ Problems: Fruit is messy and attractive to birds. Pruning
maintenance can be costly. Dry rot is sometimes an
unsightly problem on frond stubs and trunk. This
palm recovers slowly from frost damage. Susceptible
to root knot nematodes, bud rot, and palm borers. May
develop magnesium deficiency.
▪ Scientific Name: Phoenix dactylifera
▫ Common Name: Senegal Date Palm
▫ Palm Type: Feather
▫ Description: Tall and slender, this species develops a
dense head of graceful, feathery fronds. The bright
green leaves are much smaller than those of the Canary
Island or date palm. Suckers from the base can be
encouraged to form a tree with several trunks. These
tend to lean away from one another as they mature.
Hybrids of this species and Canary Island date palm
are hardier and more massive in scale.
▫ Landscape Use: This is a very striking specimen palm
adapted for use in warm, sheltered microclimates in
low elevation desert locations. The slender leaning
▫ Common Name: True date palm
habit of the clump form lends great charm and a
▫ Palm Type: Feather
distinctly tropical appearance to the landscape.
▫ Description: A rough textured slender trunk and
▫ Foliage: Evergreen
feathery, wide-spreading canopy characterize the date
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 9-13/ Sunset H2, 9, 13-17, and
palm. The gray-green head of leaves is ascending in the
center and down-curving towards the outside, giving 21-24
a stiff formal appearance. Offshoots may appear at ▫ Height: 20’-30’
ground level or infrequently on the trunk. Trees are ▫ Light Exposure: Part shade to full sun
male or female, and both sexes must be planted to ▫ Spread: 8’-12’
ensure fruit production. In some areas, pollen can be ▫ Water Use: Medium to high
obtained commercially to fertilize a single female tree. ▫ Growth Rate: Moderate
▫ Landscape Use: In urban landscapes this palm makes ▫ Trunk Width: clumping
a dramatic specimen tree. It is also planted in rows ▫ Cultural Requirements: Plants respond well to regular
along roadways and drives. The date palm blends well
watering and application of nitrogen fertilizers. Not
with desert growth to give a feeling of a desert oasis.
commonly available in Arizona.
Its slender trunk makes this species more graceful for
▫ Problems: For use in protected, nearly frost-free,
some landscape uses than Canary Island date palm.
microclimate areas only. Severe frost damage may be
▫ Foliage: Evergreen
expected when temperatures fall below the mid-20s F.
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 8-12/Sunset H1, H2, 8, 9, and 11-
24 ▪ Scientific Name: Phoenix roebelenii
▫ Height: 50’-60’
▫ Light Exposure: Part shade to full sun
▫ Spread: 25’- 35’
▫ Water Use: Low, medium or high
▫ Growth Rate: Slow
▫ Trunk Width: 1’-2’
▫ Cultural Requirements: To develop a single trunk
or maintain a neat appearance, offshoots need to be
removed or limited to a few in number. Transplanting
is best in late spring. Regular irrigation and fertilizer ▫ Common Name: Pygmy date palm
encourages best growth. ▫ Palm Type: Feather
▫ Problems: Old fronds and fruit drop require ▫ Description: This dwarf, slow-growing palm develops
considerable cleanup. Too messy for pool/patio use. a dense, graceful crown on a single, straight to curving
Susceptible to bud rot, palm borer, and nematodes.
trunk. The arching finely cut, dark green leaves create a
Pruning may be costly when the palm is tall.
delicate, refined appearance.
--- Page 12 ---
▫ Landscape Use: The Pygmy date palm is valued as ▪ Scientific Name: Sabal uresana
a highly decorative, small-scale palm for protected
locations. It is ideally suited for container culture.
▫ Foliage: Evergreen
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 9-14/ Sunset H1, H2, 13, 16, 17,
and 22-24
▫ Height: 6’-8’
▫ Light Exposure: Part shade to full sun
▫ Spread: 3’-5’
▫ Water Use: Medium to high
▫ Growth Rate: Slow
▫ Trunk width: 4”-6”
▫ Cultural Requirements: Regular watering and ▫ Common Name: Sonoran palmetto
application of nitrogen fertilizer promotes vigorous, ▫ Palm Type: Fan
lush growth. ▫ Description: This picturesque fan palm is native to
▫ Problems: Spines present on the leaf petiole are a minor the canyons and tablelands of Sonora, Mexico. Young
nuisance. Frost damage is likely in cold microclimates. plants are particularly attractive forming a cluster of
Susceptible to micronutrient deficiencies. large bluish-green fans with deeply divided segments.
With maturity, the blue color of the fans becomes less
▪ Scientific Name: Rhapis excelsa prominent and a fairly stout trunk develops, especially
if covered with persistent leaf bases.
▫ Landscape Use: The Sonoran palmetto is excellent as a
specimen, along avenues or in parks.
▫ Foliage: Evergreen
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 7-10
▫ Height: 30’-40’
▫ Light Exposure: Full sun
▫ Spread: 15’-25’
▫ Water Use: Low to medium
▫ Growth Rate: Slow
▫ Trunk Width: 2’-3’
▫ Cultural Requirements: Once established, this palm is
▫ Common Name: Broadleaf lady palm
very cold hardy. Well drained soil is necessary for best
▫ Palm Type: Fan
growth.
▫ Description: A cultivated tree, native to southern China
▫ Problems: Not commonly available in Arizona.
with multiple bamboo-like trunks. Dark green, glossy
foliage has wide segments (thus, the name Broadleaf ▪ Scientific Name: Syagrus romanzoffiana
lady palm.)
▫ Landscape Use: Well suited to low-light, and low-
humidity environments. Suitable for indoor use.
▫ Foliage: Evergreen
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 10-15/ Sunset H1, H2, 12-17, and
19-24
▫ Height: 12’
▫ Light Exposure: Shade or bright, indirect light.
▫ Spread: Clumping habit
▫ Water Use: Moderate
▫ Growth Rate: Slow (indoors) to moderate (outdoors)
▫ Trunk Width: Multi-stemmed trunk up to 1” in
diameter. ▫ Common Name: Queen palm
▫ Cultural Requirements: Low light, low humidity. ▫ Palm Type: Feather
Propagates readily from underground rhizomes. ▫ Description: A tall, graceful palm with a luxurious
Requires evenly moist, but well drained soil. head of arching 10-15-foot fronds. Prominent rings
▫ Problems: Poorly suited to cold temperatures outside develop on the smooth gray, upright trunk. The bright-
of USDA Zones 10-15, with poor drought tolerance. green, feathery leaves form long, papery filaments
Best suited to low light conditions as leaves may burn with exposure to wind and temperature extremes.
in full sun. Somewhat susceptible to scale insects ▫ Landscape Use: The Queen palm creates a lush,
and root rot with poorly drained soils or unsuitable tropical effect for pools, home gardens or courtyards
of large buildings. It makes a showy appearance both
environments.
--- Page 13 ---
as a single specimen or clumped in groups. ▪ Scientific Name: Washingtonia filifera
▫ Foliage: Evergreen
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 9-15/Sunset H1, H2, 12-17, and
19-23
▫ Height: 30’ - 40’
▫ Light Exposure: Part shade to full sun.
▫ Spread: 15’ – 30’
▫ Water Use: Medium to high.
▫ Growth Rate: Moderate to fast.
▫ Trunk Width: 1’-1.5’
▫ Cultural Requirements: This palm responds well to
nitrogen fertilizer, extra iron, and ample water. Plant in
protected areas to reduce wind and cold damage.
▫ Problems: Cold sensitivity limits use to below 2500’
elevation. Fronds may develop iron chlorosis and
manganese deficiency. Susceptible to spider mites, ▫ Common Name: California fan palm
root knot nematode, and bud rot. High winds may also ▫ Palm Type: Fan
damage long fronds. ▫ Description: A powerful, stately palm whose heavy
trunk supports a crown of large, fan-shaped leaves.
▪ Scientific Name: Trachycarpus fortunei
Foliage stands erect and spreading on spiny petioles
when young. With maturity, leaves droop to the
smooth trunk forming a handsome thatch. This
species hybridizes easily with W. robusta, so that a
large variation in appearance is possible, even from
commercial sources.
▫ Landscape Use: The massive character of this palm
tends to dominate small landscapes and small
structures. The best use is as a street or park tree or a
specimen in large-scale landscapes.
▫ Foliage: Evergreen
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 8-14/Sunset H1, H2, 8-24
▫ Height: 40’-60’
▫ Light Exposure: Part shade to full sun
▫ Spread: 15’-20’
▫ Water Use: Low to Medium
▫ Common Name: Windmill palm
▫ Growth Rate: Moderate to fast
▫ Palm Type: Fan
▫ Trunk Width: 2’-3’
▫ Description: Windmill palm is small, slow-growing
▫ Cultural Requirements: Some drought tolerance is
and tolerant of both heat and cold. Fan-shaped leaves
shown but prefers regular, infrequent, deep irrigation.
are displayed in a windmill-like fashion in a compact,
Good soil drainage is important. Periodic grooming
regular head. The slender, upright trunk tapers
to improve appearance and intermittent removal of
inversely from top to bottom. Stubs of old fronds
volunteer seedlings. Fertilize annually in spring or
protrude from a shaggy covering of hairy, black fibers.
summer.
▫ Landscape Use: This semi-dwarf compact species is
▫ Problems: Thatch may harbor pests and be a fire
effective for tropical plantings, atriums and containers.
hazard. Yearly trimming can be costly. Susceptible to
It makes artistic pairs for an entryway, along a narrow
walk or drive. bud rot and root knot nematodes.
▫ Foliage: Evergreen
▪ Scientific Name: Washingtonia robusta
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 7-10/Sunset H1, 4-24
▫ Height: 30’-40’
▫ Light Exposure: Part shade to full sun
▫ Spread: 6’-8’
▫ Water Use: Medium to high
▫ Growth Rate: Slow
▫ Trunk Width: 4”-6”
▫ Cultural Requirements: Responds well to regular
irrigation and fertilizer. Appearance is best when
grown in the shelter of taller trees or on the east side of
structures where the tree is shaded from afternoon sun.
Occasional pruning is necessary for a neat appearance.
▫ Problems: Fronds may become tattered in high winds
and tip-burn with reflected sun and heat.
--- Page 14 ---
▫ Common Name: Mexican fan palm Miller, V.J. 1983. Arizona’s own palm: Washingtonia filifera.
▫ Palm Type: Fan Desert Plants 5(3):99-104.
▫ Description: This tall, graceful fast-growing palm Olsen, M. 1999. Diseases of Urban Plants in Arizona. Univ. of
Bright green, fan-shaped leaves form a luxuriant
Olsen, M. W. 2011. Root-Knot Nematode. Univ. of Arizona
and more compact head than California fan palm.
The trunk flares at the base but tapers into a slender
Pittenger, D.R., A.J. Downer, D.R. Hodel, and M. Mochizuki.
column above. The dry leaf thatch might not be as
2009. Estimating water needs of landscape palms in
uniform or attractive as that of the California fan palm.
Mediterranean climates. HortTechnology 19(4):700-704.
It can be removed or allowed to hang naturally, and
Pittenger, D.R., D.R. Hodel, and A.J. Downer. 2005.
often breaks loose. This species hybridizes easily with
Transplanting specimen palms: a review of common
W. filifera, so that a large variation in appearance is
practices and research-based information. HortTechnology
possible, even from commercial sources.
15:128-132
▫ Landscape Use: Planted as a street or park tree, lawn
specimen and in groups for a tropical effect. Its height,
Resources
form and ease of transplanting make it a popular
landscape specimen to lend vertical scale to large University of Florida IFAS Palm Care website: https://edis.
spaces. ifas.ufl.edu/entity/topic/palm_care
▫ Foliage: Evergreen
University of California Hodel Western Arborist Palm Series.
▫ Climate Zone: USDA 8-11/Sunset H1, H2, 8-24
https://ucanr.edu/sites/HodelPalmsTrees/Hodel_
▫ Height: 40’-100’
Western_Arborist_Palm_Series/
▫ Light Exposure: Part shade to full sun
▫ Spread: 10’-15’
Acknowledgements
▫ Water Use: Low, medium or high
▫ Growth Rate: Fast This work is a complete revision of a previous bulletin
▫ Trunk Width: 1’-1.5’
by E. Davison and J. Begeman. Gratitude is extended to Dr.
▫ Cultural Requirements: Tolerance is shown to poor
Donald R. Hodel for suggestions on the manuscript.
conditions but best growth occurs with good soil and
regular irrigation. Occasional grooming is needed. Special thanks to Pauline Savage of Pauline Savage Art
Fertilize annually. Studio. (https://www.paulinesavage.com/) for rendering
▫ Problems: Although often injured by winter cold, near of the palm illustrations in this publication.
the limits of its range this palm regrows a new head
Line Drawing of Rhapis excelsa is from http://commons.
of leaves by mid-spring. Somewhat more disease-
resistant than other palms. Palm flower caterpillars wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Rhapis_excelsa.png
are an occasional litter problem beneath the tree or in
nearby structures. Avoid planting near power lines.
References
Broschat, T.K. 2009. Palm nutrition and fertilization.
HortTechnology 19:690-694.
Broschat, T.K. 2021. Not all landscape palm fertilizers are
created equal. UF/IFAS Extension Publication ENH1255. AUTHORS
Davison, E. and J. Begeman. 2000. Arizona Landscape Palms.
UrsUla K. schUch
Professor and Specialist, Environmental Horticulture
AZ1021.
Tanya M. QUisT
Associate Professor of Practice and Director Campus Arboretum
Elliott, M.L., T.K. Broschat, J.Y. Uchida, and G.W. Simone. 2010.
CONTACT
Compendium of Ornamental Palm Diseases and Disorders.
American Phytopathological Society.
UrsUla K. schUch
uschuch@arizona.edu
Hodel, D. R., 2012. The Biology and Management of Landscape
This information has been reviewed
Palms. Britton Fund, Western Chapter, International Society
by University faculty.
of Arboriculture, Porterville, CA. extension.arizona.edu/pubs/az2021-2023.pdf
can be found at:
transplanting palms. Acta Hortic. 1014, 115-118. https://
extension.arizona.edu/pubs
doi.org/10.17660/ActaHortic.2013.1014.20
sexual orientation, gender identity, or genetic information in its programs and activities.