--- Page 1 ---
Backyard Gardener
# 80
Ocotillo
Ocotillo (Fouquieria splendens) is a unique native desert plant
with low-branching, spiny, canes. Ocotillos can grow over 15
feet in height and as wide. In spring, they are topped with
bright orange-red, tubular flowers. They are typically leafless
most of the year, but produce many leaves after receiving sub-
stantial precipitation. When the soil dries, ocotillos quickly shed
their leaves to reduce evaporative loss and conserve plant
moisture. Ocotillos are extremely drought tolerant and an excel-
lent accent plant for residential and commercial landscapes.
Ocotillo’s native range includes the Sonoran and Chihuahuan
deserts from Baja, California eastward to the Trans-Pecos in
Texas and south to Zacatecas, Mexico. Ocotillos are also na-
tive to some areas of the Verde Valley where they are found on
south-facing gentle to moderate slopes. This is likely due to
their need for well-drained soils, heat, and relative intolerance
of prolonged low temperatures. Ocotillos will tolerate tempera-
tures down to 10 degrees F. For planting in the Verde Valley
area, try to find a warm site with well-drained soils.
Ocotillos are available from selected nurseries. Many of these
are salvaged plants that either come from construction areas in
Arizona or are collected in other states (many are from Texas).
However, ocotillos are protected native plants and may not be
legally possessed, taken or transported from the growing site
without a permit from the Arizona Department of Agriculture.
Ocotillo’ Fourquieria splendens in full bloom. Photo by Jack
ple, but greatest success is achieved during March through May.
Like cacti and other succulents, ocotillos should be transplanted to the original growing depth and in their original direc-
tional orientation. The original south side of the plant, which receives more heat and is more sunlight-resistant, should
again face the hotter southern direction. Well drained sandy or gravelly loam soils favor ocotillo root development.
People transplanting ocotillos should dig the planting hole wide enough to accommodate the root system and no deep-
er than the root system. After digging the planting hole, check for drainage by filling the hole with water. If the hole
drains within an hour, it is suitable for planting ocotillo. Do not use organic amendments in the backfill. Broken or dam-
aged roots should be cleanly pruned and allowed to dry for a week prior to planting. Container grown plants do not re-
quire any root pruning prior to planting.
Care should be taken to minimize air pockets in the backfill material. The Desert Botanical Garden of Phoenix, AZ rec-
ommends adding 30% coarse sand to existing backfill. They also recommend soaking the root system with a solution
of rooting hormone prior to planting. Work dry soil in amongst the roots of bare root plants to ensure that the backfill is
in contact with the roots. There should be no need to use stakes or guys even though the plant is placed very shallow
in the soil. However, if there is a potential for blow down on bare root plants, consider using large stones placed 6 inch-
es or so away from the trunk to support the canes until they root. It’s not necessary, nor recommended, that the tops of
ocotillo plants be pruned back when transplanting.
--- Page 2 ---
Ocotillo BYG #80
Too much irrigation following transplanting can kill ocotillos. In most cases, ocotillos should be irrigated weekly at a mini-
mum during the summer months and twice per month during the winter. Once established (you will know when they leaf
out routinely and start to flower which may take anywhere from 6 to 24 months) you can begin to reduce supplemental
irrigation. Most established ocotillos do not require any supplemental water during the cooler months and certainly no
more than every second to fourth week during the hottest of summers.
You can tell if the plant is still alive by checking the canes to see if they are still pliable and have a greenish color to
them. Containerized plants should become established at a much faster rate than bare root plants. Transplanted ocotil-
los require patience, but once established, these beautiful plants will enhance the landscape for many years.
Additional Resource
March 18, 2023
Adapted from original Backyard Gardener publications by Jeff Schalau, Agent, Agriculture & Natural Resources,
on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, veteran status, sexual orientation, gender
identity, or genetic information in its programs and activities.