--- Page 1 ---
Backyard Gardener
#70
Wildflowers
Wildflowers and native grasses are perfect for creating informal, low-maintenance landscape areas. They provide habi-
tat for butterflies, bees, and other desirable insects as well as wild birds, reptiles, and mammals. Over time, seasonal
colors will change, textures will vary, and plant species will even subtly shift their locations as the plants naturalize. Giv-
en the informal appearance of a meadow, one would think that creating one would be easy, but this is false. Natural
looking meadows can be difficult to establish in areas that have been neglected and/or disturbed.
It is best to start small so that you can nurture the meadow and keep weeds out. This also allows for natural expansion
of the area. Wildflowers prefer a sunny location with good drainage. First, you should reduce the weed population in
your meadow area. Perennial weeds should be managed to prevent them from choking out desirable plants. Herbi-
cides can be used without deleterious impacts to natives if selected and applied correctly. Annual weeds should be
pulled before they go to seed. By watering and observing, you will also learn to recognize juvenile weeds.
Soils should be amended with a small amount of compost or other weed-free organic matter to improve water holding
capacity and aeration. Lightly scratch the compost into the soil to a shallow depth (2 to 4 inches) using a garden culti-
vator. Rake the bed smooth and irrigate thoroughly. After the amended soil has settled and become friable, it is ready
for seeding. Do not apply nitrogen fertilizer as it can be detrimental to wildflowers.
Wildflowers, like grasses, are either adapted to grow in the warm season or cool season. Cool season plants germinate
in winter or early spring and die out when it gets hot. Warm season plants rely on warm soil temperatures to germinate
and thrive in hot weather. Beware of inexpensive wildflower seed mixes. They may not be well adapted to our local
climate and elevation and may even contain prohibited or invasive species. Native grasses are also a pleasant addition
to a wildflower meadow and these can also be seeded, divided, or transplanted.
High quality wildflower seed is often expensive and should be broadcast sparingly. Read the label to ensure the seed
you purchase is free of weeds and suitable for your area. Beware of mixes that contain cosmos, bachelor buttons, and
sweet alyssum. These are not really wildflowers and are often used as filler in low quality seed mixes.
Broadcast the seed and rake it lightly to ensure soil contact. Do not bury the seed deeply. It only requires good seed/
soil contact. During the first two months, moisture is very critical. Timing the seeding with a moist season is the best
way to get seeds in synch with their environment. Supplemental irrigation can be used if precipitation is lacking. After
two months, the seedlings should be up. You may also need to protect the area from rabbits with a temporary low
fence – especially during periods of drought.
Some suitable cool season wildflowers are: Penstemon (many species), California or Mexican Poppy (Eschscholtzia
sp.), Blue Flax (Linum lewisii), Desert Marigold (Baileya multiradiata), Blue Dick (Dichelostemma puchellum), Lupine
(Lupinus sp.), Clarkia (Clarkia sp.), Columbine (Aquilegia sp.), and Phlox (Phlox sp.). A great cool season native grass
is needle and thread (Hesperostipa comata). Most of these can be planted in early spring and require cool, moist expo-
sure to the soil to germinate. This is called stratification.
--- Page 2 ---
Wildflowers BYG #70
Some suitable warm season wildflowers are: Evening Primrose (Oenethera sp.), Blanketflower (Gaillardia sp.), Paper-
flower (Psilostrophe bakerii), Blackfoot Daisy (Melampodium leucanthum), Butterfly Weed (Asclepias tuberosa), Rocky
Mountain Bee Plant (Cleome serrulata), Verbena (Verbena sp.), and Globemallow (Sphaeralcea sp.). Two attractive
grasses are Indian Ricegrass (Achnatherum hymenoides) and Blue Grama (Bouteloua gracilis). These are best seeded
in May or June before monsoon rains.
Blanketflower or firewheel (Gaillardia pulchel- Globemallow (Sphaeralcea sp.), com- Golden columbine (Aquilegia chrysantha)
la), common wildflower in many landscapes mon wildflower in Yavapai County. grows in shady glades near riparian areas
and roadside plantings in Yavapai County. in northern Arizona.
Be patient as wildflowers can be slow to establish and plan on weeding your meadow for at least the first year or two.
Pull or treat the weeds before they go to seed and remember to give the meadow some water during our typical May/
June warm dry period if precipitation is scarce. All of the species mentioned are included in the on-line Yavapai County
Native and Naturalized Plant Database (http://cals.arizona.edu/yavapaiplants).
Additional Resource
Seed Ball Strategies for Gardening and Restoration in Arid Landscapes,
https://extension.arizona.edu/sites/extension.arizona.edu/files/pubs/az1797-2019.pdf
March 5, 2023
Adapted from original Backyard Gardener publications by Jeff Schalau, Agent, Agriculture & Natural Resources,
on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, veteran status, sexual orientation, gender
identity, or genetic information in its programs and activities.